# suite: Release examples
release/examples/benchmarks/ssca2/SSCA2_main.graph
release/examples/benchmarks/ssca2/edge_generation.graph
release/examples/benchmarks/ssca2/total_time.graph
release/examples/benchmarks/lcals/LCALS-raw-short.graph
release/examples/benchmarks/lcals/LCALS-raw-medium.graph
release/examples/benchmarks/lcals/LCALS-raw-long.graph
release/examples/benchmarks/lcals/LCALS-parallel-short.graph
release/examples/benchmarks/lcals/LCALS-parallel-medium.graph
release/examples/benchmarks/lcals/LCALS-parallel-long.graph
release/examples/benchmarks/lulesh/lulesh.graph
release/examples/benchmarks/hpcc/stream.graph
release/examples/benchmarks/hpcc/ra.graph
release/examples/benchmarks/hpcc/stream-ep.graph
release/examples/benchmarks/hpcc/ptrans.graph
release/examples/benchmarks/hpcc/fft.graph
release/examples/benchmarks/hpcc/hpl.graph
studies/shootout/binary-trees/binary-trees.graph
studies/shootout/chameneos-redux/chameneos-redux.graph
studies/shootout/fannkuch-redux/fannkuch-redux.graph
studies/shootout/fasta/fasta.graph
studies/shootout/k-nucleotide/knucleotide.graph
studies/shootout/mandelbrot/mandelbrot.graph
studies/shootout/meteor/kbrady/meteor.graph
studies/shootout/nbody/nbody.graph
studies/shootout/pidigits/pidigits.graph
studies/shootout/regex-dna/regexdna.graph
studies/shootout/regexdna-redux/regexdna-redux.graph
studies/shootout/reverse-complement/revcomp.graph
studies/shootout/spectral-norm/spectralnorm.graph
studies/shootout/thread-ring/thread-ring.graph
# suite: Performance tracking
release/examples/benchmarks/ssca2/total_time.graph
release/examples/benchmarks/lulesh/lulesh.graph
release/examples/benchmarks/miniMD/miniMD.graph
studies/comd/llnl/CoMD.graph
studies/comd/elegant/arrayOfStructs/CoMD-elegant-aos.graph
studies/isx/isx.graph
release/examples/benchmarks/isx/isx-release.graph
studies/hpcc/STREAM_study.graph
studies/hpcc/STREAM_study_fragmented.graph
release/examples/benchmarks/hpcc/ra.graph
release/examples/benchmarks/hpcc/ptrans.graph
release/examples/benchmarks/hpcc/fft.graph
release/examples/benchmarks/hpcc/hpl.graph
release/examples/benchmarks/lcals/LCALS-raw-long.graph
release/examples/benchmarks/lcals/LCALS-parallel-short.graph
release/examples/benchmarks/lcals/LCALS-parallel-long.graph
studies/shootout/binary-trees/binary-trees.graph
studies/shootout/chameneos-redux/chameneos-redux.graph
studies/shootout/fannkuch-redux/fannkuch-redux.graph
studies/shootout/fasta/fasta.graph
studies/shootout/k-nucleotide/knucleotide.graph
studies/shootout/mandelbrot/mandelbrot.graph
studies/shootout/meteor/kbrady/meteor.graph
studies/shootout/nbody/nbody.graph
studies/shootout/pidigits/pidigits.graph
studies/shootout/regex-dna/regexdna.graph
studies/shootout/regexdna-redux/regexdna-redux.graph
studies/shootout/reverse-complement/revcomp.graph
studies/shootout/spectral-norm/spectralnorm.graph
studies/shootout/thread-ring/thread-ring.graph
npb/cg/cg-a.graph
npb/ep/ep-b.graph
npb/ft/ft-a.graph
users/npadmana/npb-mg/mg-b.graph
arrays/diten/time_iterate.graph
arrays/diten/time_array_vs_tuple.graph
arrays/diten/time_array_vs_ddata.graph
arrays/ferguson/return-array-40000000.graph
arrays/lydia/time_access.graph
domains/ferguson/build-associative.graph
domains/elliot/primes.graph
types/atomic/ferguson/atomictest.graph
performance/bradc/parOpEquals.graph
performance/sungeun/assign.1024.graph
performance/sungeun/init.graph
performance/thomasvandoren/matrix-multiply.graph
distributions/robust/associative/performance/array_iter.graph
performance/elliot/no-op.graph
performance/bharshbarg/forall-dom-range.graph
performance/bharshbarg/arr-forall.graph
performance/bharshbarg/views-forall-index.graph
performance/bharshbarg/views-forall-iter.graph
performance/bharshbarg/create-views.graph
studies/prk/Stencil/prk-stencil-time.graph
types/string/ferguson/temporary-copies.graph
types/string/psahabu/perf/arguments.graph
types/string/psahabu/perf/search.graph
users/franzf/v0/chpl/main.graph
reductions/diten/testSerialReductions.graph
reductions/vass/reductions-perf.graph
studies/rbc/tvandoren/RBC.graph
exercises/c-ray/old/c-ray.graph
users/npadmana/twopt/twopt-buildtrees.graph
users/npadmana/twopt/twopt-paircount.graph
performance/compiler/bradc/AllCompTime.graph
memleaksfull.graph
studies/jacobi/jacobi.graph
library/standard/List/perf/listBenchmark1.graph
# suite: HPC Challenge
studies/hpcc/STREAM_study_fragmented.graph
studies/hpcc/STREAM_study.graph
studies/hpcc/STREAM_study_promote.graph
# suite: Performance Graphs (TEPS, GB/s, etc.)
release/examples/benchmarks/hpcc/stream_performance.graph
release/examples/benchmarks/hpcc/ra_performance.graph
release/examples/benchmarks/hpcc/stream-ep_performance.graph
release/examples/benchmarks/hpcc/ptrans_performance.graph
release/examples/benchmarks/hpcc/fft_performance.graph
release/examples/benchmarks/hpcc/hpl_performance.graph
studies/hpcc/STREAM_study_performance.graph
release/examples/benchmarks/ssca2/performance.graph
# suite: DOE proxy apps
studies/lulesh/bradc/lulesh-dense.graph
release/examples/benchmarks/miniMD/miniMD.graph
studies/comd/llnl/CoMD.graph
studies/comd/elegant/arrayOfStructs/CoMD-elegant-aos.graph
release/examples/benchmarks/lcals/LCALS-raw-short.graph
release/examples/benchmarks/lcals/LCALS-raw-medium.graph
release/examples/benchmarks/lcals/LCALS-raw-long.graph
release/examples/benchmarks/lcals/LCALS-parallel-short.graph
release/examples/benchmarks/lcals/LCALS-parallel-medium.graph
release/examples/benchmarks/lcals/LCALS-parallel-long.graph
# suite: Shootout benchmarks
studies/shootout/binary-trees/binary-trees.graph
studies/shootout/chameneos-redux/chameneos-redux.graph
studies/shootout/fannkuch-redux/fannkuch-redux.graph
studies/shootout/fasta/fasta.graph
studies/shootout/k-nucleotide/knucleotide.graph
studies/shootout/mandelbrot/mandelbrot.graph
studies/shootout/meteor/kbrady/meteor.graph
studies/shootout/nbody/nbody.graph
studies/shootout/pidigits/pidigits.graph
studies/shootout/regex-dna/regexdna.graph
studies/shootout/regexdna-redux/regexdna-redux.graph
studies/shootout/reverse-complement/revcomp.graph
studies/shootout/spectral-norm/spectralnorm.graph
studies/shootout/thread-ring/thread-ring.graph
# suite: Submitted Shootout benchmarks
studies/shootout/submitted/binarytrees-submitted.graph
studies/shootout/submitted/fannkuchredux-submitted.graph
studies/shootout/submitted/fasta-submitted.graph
studies/shootout/submitted/knucleotide-submitted.graph
studies/shootout/submitted/mandelbrot-submitted.graph
studies/shootout/submitted/nbody-submitted.graph
studies/shootout/submitted/pidigits-submitted.graph
studies/shootout/submitted/regexdna-submitted.graph
studies/shootout/submitted/regexdnaredux-submitted.graph
studies/shootout/submitted/revcomp-submitted.graph
studies/shootout/submitted/spectralnorm-submitted.graph
# suite: Shootout extras
studies/shootout/fasta/fasta-extras.graph
studies/shootout/fasta/fastaredux.graph
studies/shootout/mandelbrot/mandelbrot-extras.graph
studies/shootout/spectral-norm/lydia/spectral-norm-specify-step.graph
# suite: Parboil benchmarks
studies/parboil/BFS/bfs.graph
studies/parboil/histo/histo.graph
studies/parboil/SAD/sad.graph
studies/parboil/stencil/stencil.graph
# suite: PARSEC benchmarks
studies/parsec/blackscholes.graph
studies/parsec/blackscholes_promote.graph
# suite: ISx benchmark
studies/isx/isx.graph
studies/isx/isx-bucket-spmd.graph
studies/isx/isx-hand-optimized.graph
studies/isx/isx-no-return.graph
studies/isx/isx-per-task.graph
release/examples/benchmarks/isx/isx-release.graph
# suite: PRK benchmarks
studies/prk/Synch_p2p/prk-synch_p2p.graph
studies/prk/Synch_p2p/prk-synch_p2p-time.graph
studies/prk/Stencil/prk-stencil.graph
studies/prk/Stencil/prk-stencil-time.graph
studies/prk/Transpose/prk-transpose.graph
studies/prk/Transpose/prk-transpose-time.graph
# suite: NAS Parallel benchmarks
npb/cg/cg.graph
npb/cg/cg-a.graph
npb/ep/ep.graph
npb/ep/ep-b.graph
npb/ft/ft.graph
npb/ft/ft-a.graph
users/npadmana/npb-mg/mg.graph
users/npadmana/npb-mg/mg-b.graph
# suite: Array/Domain performance
arrays/diten/arrayPerformance-2d.graph
arrays/diten/arrayPerformance-1d.graph
arrays/diten/time_iterate.graph
arrays/diten/time_array_vs_tuple.graph
arrays/diten/time_array_vs_ddata.graph
arrays/diten/time_array_vs_ref.graph
arrays/diten/time_array_vs_ref_forall.graph
arrays/diten/time_array_vs_ref_multidim.graph
performance/bharshbarg/forall-dom-range.graph
performance/bharshbarg/arr-forall.graph
arrays/lydia/time_access.graph
performance/bradc/parOpEquals.graph
performance/sungeun/copy_to_local.graph
performance/sungeun/assign.256.graph
performance/sungeun/dgemm.128.graph
performance/sungeun/assign.1024.graph
performance/sungeun/assign_across_locales.256.graph
performance/sungeun/dgemm.64.graph
performance/sungeun/assign_across_locales.1024.graph
performance/sungeun/init.graph
distributions/robust/associative/performance/array_iter.graph
distributions/robust/associative/performance/domain_iter.graph
domains/bradc/domEqualityPerf.graph
performance/thomasvandoren/matrix-multiply.graph
types/string/ferguson/array-of-strings-read.graph
arrays/ferguson/return-array-8.graph
arrays/ferguson/return-array-20000000.graph
arrays/ferguson/return-array-40000000.graph
domains/ferguson/build-associative.graph
performance/sparse/domainAssignment-similar.graph
performance/sparse/domainAssignment-dissimilar.graph
# suite: Atomic performance
types/atomic/ferguson/atomictest.graph
# suite: Dynamic iterators
functions/iterators/angeles/dynamic.graph
functions/iterators/angeles/distAdaptativeWSv1.graph
functions/iterators/angeles/distAdaptativeWSv2.graph
functions/iterators/angeles/guided.graph
functions/iterators/angeles/distAdaptativeWS.graph
# suite: Parallel Statement Comparisons
parallel/taskCompare/lydia/forBeginCompare.graph
parallel/taskCompare/lydia/coforallCompare.graph
parallel/taskCompare/lydia/coforallBeginCompare.graph
parallel/taskCompare/lydia/loopCompare.graph
# suite: Task Spawning
parallel/taskCompare/elliot/taskSpawn.graph
parallel/taskCompare/elliot/serialTaskSpawn.graph
studies/hpcc/STREAMS/elliot/stream-task-placement.graph
# suite: Barrier
performance/comm/barrier/empty-chpl-barrier.graph
studies/hpcc/STREAMS/elliot/stream-spmd-barrier.graph
# suite: Compiler performance
performance/compiler/bradc/fft-timecomp.graph
performance/compiler/bradc/compSampler-timecomp.graph
performance/compiler/bradc/cg-sparse-timecomp.graph
performance/compiler/bradc/AllCompTime.graph
# suite: Memory tracking
memleaks.graph
memleaksfull.graph
ml-memleaksfull.graph
# suite: Memory allocation
memory/lifetime/allocation.graph
# suite: Code size tracking
studies/jacobi/jacobi.graph
# suite: Startup tracking
performance/elliot/no-op.graph
# suite: MAX_LOGICAL comparison
npb/ep/ep.graph
npb/ep/ep-b.graph
release/examples/benchmarks/hpcc/hpl.graph
studies/hpcc/STREAM_study_fragmented.graph
studies/shootout/fannkuch-redux/fannkuch-redux.graph
studies/shootout/spectral-norm/spectralnorm.graph
studies/shootout/mandelbrot/mandelbrot.graph
# suite: String perf tests
types/string/cassella/cast-from-string.graph
types/string/ferguson/temporary-copies.graph
types/string/psahabu/split-whitespace-perf.graph
types/string/psahabu/perf/allocate.graph
types/string/psahabu/perf/arguments.graph
types/string/psahabu/perf/search.graph
types/string/psahabu/perf/search-throughput.graph
types/string/psahabu/perf/substring.graph
# suite: Standard Library
library/packages/Sort/performance/sorts-linearithmic.graph
library/packages/Sort/performance/sorts-quadratic.graph
library/packages/LinearAlgebra/performance/dot-perf.graph
library/packages/LinearAlgebra/performance/linearalgebra-perf.graph
sparse/CS/multiplication/cs-multiplication.graph
sparse/CS/resize/cs-resize.graph
library/packages/Sort/RadixSort/radixsortMSB.graph
# suite: Misc
users/franzf/v0/chpl/main.graph
reductions/diten/testSerialReductions.graph
reductions/vass/reductions-perf.graph
parallel/forall/reduce-intents/ri-a2-AoA.graph
studies/paracr/asenjo/PARACR-BC.graph
library/standard/BitOps/c-tests/performance/bitops.graph
library/standard/Random/performance/getNextPerf.graph
studies/rbc/tvandoren/RBC.graph
exercises/c-ray/old/c-ray.graph
scan/scanPerf.graph
# suite: Colorado State University
studies/colostate/Jacobi1D.graph
studies/colostate/Jacobi2D.graph
studies/colostate/cfd-mini.graph
# suite: Nikhil Padmanabhan
users/npadmana/twopt/twopt-buildtrees.graph
users/npadmana/twopt/twopt-paircount.graph
# suite: Elegance
studies/elegance/elegance.graph
# suite: Bale
studies/bale/toposort/toposort.perf.graph
studies/bale/toposort/toposort.time.graph
# suite: Serial Performance
patterns/primality/prime.graph
statements/lydia/forCompare.graph
statements/lydia/whileCompare.graph
io/vass/time-write.graph
arrays/diten/time_iterate.graph
arrays/lydia/time_access.graph
statements/lydia/externMethodCallPerf.graph
statements/lydia/forVersusWhilePerf.graph
statements/lydia/ifVersusSelect.graph
statements/lydia/ifVersusSelect.random.graph
statements/lydia/ifVersusSelect.alternates.graph
statements/lydia/moduleVersusFunctionBaseline.graph
statements/lydia/moduleVersusFunctionDifAccess.graph
statements/lydia/moduleVersusFunction.graph
library/standard/Map/timeMapMinusEqual.graph
library/standard/Map/moby-perf.graph
# suite: - Chapel versus C Comparisons
patterns/primality/prime.graph
statements/lydia/forCompare.graph
statements/lydia/whileCompare.graph
io/vass/time-write.graph
arrays/diten/time_iterate.graph
arrays/lydia/time_access.graph
statements/lydia/externMethodCallPerf.graph
# suite: - Statement Comparisons
statements/lydia/forVersusWhilePerf.graph
statements/lydia/ifVersusSelect.graph
statements/lydia/ifVersusSelect.random.graph
statements/lydia/ifVersusSelect.alternates.graph
statements/lydia/moduleVersusFunctionBaseline.graph
statements/lydia/moduleVersusFunctionDifAccess.graph
statements/lydia/moduleVersusFunction.graph
# suite: Samples (bogus)
Samples/Performance/foo.graph
Samples/Performance/cleanCopy/foobar.graph
