.TH HPL_dtrsm 3 "January 20, 2004" "HPL 1.0a" "HPL Library Functions"
.SH NAME
HPL_dtrsm \- B := A^{-1} * B  or  B := B * A^{-1}.
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fB\&#include "hpl.h"\fR
 
\fB\&void\fR
\fB\&HPL_dtrsm(\fR
\fB\&const enum HPL_ORDER\fR
\fI\&ORDER\fR,
\fB\&const enum HPL_SIDE\fR
\fI\&SIDE\fR,
\fB\&const enum HPL_UPLO\fR
\fI\&UPLO\fR,
\fB\&const enum HPL_TRANS\fR
\fI\&TRANS\fR,
\fB\&const enum HPL_DIAG\fR
\fI\&DIAG\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&M\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&N\fR,
\fB\&const double\fR
\fI\&ALPHA\fR,
\fB\&const double *\fR
\fI\&A\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&LDA\fR,
\fB\&double *\fR
\fI\&B\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&LDB\fR
\fB\&);\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fB\&HPL_dtrsm\fR
solves one of the matrix equations
 
   op( A ) * X = alpha * B,   or  X * op( A ) = alpha * B,
 
where alpha is a scalar, X and B are m by n matrices, A is a unit, or
non-unit, upper or lower triangular matrix and op(A) is one of
 
   op( A ) = A   or   op( A ) = A^T.
 
The matrix X is overwritten on B.
 
No test for  singularity  or  near-singularity  is included  in  this
routine. Such tests must be performed before calling this routine.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP 8
ORDER   (local input)           const enum HPL_ORDER
On entry, ORDER  specifies the storage format of the operands
as follows:                                                  
   ORDER = HplRowMajor,                                      
   ORDER = HplColumnMajor.                                   
.TP 8
SIDE    (local input)           const enum HPL_SIDE
On entry, SIDE  specifies  whether  op(A) appears on the left
or right of X as follows:
   SIDE==HplLeft    op( A ) * X = alpha * B,
   SIDE==HplRight   X * op( A ) = alpha * B.
.TP 8
UPLO    (local input)           const enum HPL_UPLO
On  entry,   UPLO   specifies  whether  the  upper  or  lower
triangular  part  of the array  A  is to be referenced.  When
UPLO==HplUpper, only  the upper triangular part of A is to be
referenced, otherwise only the lower triangular part of A is 
to be referenced. 
.TP 8
TRANS   (local input)           const enum HPL_TRANS
On entry, TRANSA  specifies the form of  op(A)  to be used in
the matrix-matrix operation follows:                         
   TRANSA==HplNoTrans    : op( A ) = A,                     
   TRANSA==HplTrans      : op( A ) = A^T,                   
   TRANSA==HplConjTrans  : op( A ) = A^T.                   
.TP 8
DIAG    (local input)           const enum HPL_DIAG
On entry,  DIAG  specifies  whether  A  is unit triangular or
not. When DIAG==HplUnit,  A is assumed to be unit triangular,
and otherwise, A is not assumed to be unit triangular.
.TP 8
M       (local input)           const int
On entry,  M  specifies  the number of rows of the  matrix B.
M must be at least zero.
.TP 8
N       (local input)           const int
On entry, N  specifies the number of columns of the matrix B.
N must be at least zero.
.TP 8
ALPHA   (local input)           const double
On entry, ALPHA specifies the scalar alpha.   When  ALPHA  is
supplied  as  zero then the elements of the matrix B need not
be set on input.
.TP 8
A       (local input)           const double *
On entry,  A  points  to an array of size equal to or greater
than LDA * k,  where  k is m  when  SIDE==HplLeft  and  is  n
otherwise.  Before  entry  with  UPLO==HplUpper,  the leading
k by k upper triangular  part of the array A must contain the
upper triangular  matrix and the  strictly  lower  triangular
part of A is not referenced.  When  UPLO==HplLower on  entry,
the  leading k by k lower triangular part of the array A must
contain the lower triangular matrix  and  the  strictly upper
triangular part of A is not referenced.
 
Note that  when  DIAG==HplUnit,  the  diagonal elements of  A
not referenced  either,  but are assumed to be unity.
.TP 8
LDA     (local input)           const int
On entry,  LDA  specifies  the  leading  dimension  of  A  as
declared  in  the  calling  (sub) program.  LDA  must  be  at
least MAX(1,m) when SIDE==HplLeft, and MAX(1,n) otherwise.
.TP 8
B       (local input/output)    double *
On entry,  B  points  to an array of size equal to or greater
than LDB * n.  Before entry, the leading  m by n  part of the
array B must contain the matrix  B, except when beta is zero,
in which case B need not be set on entry.  On exit, the array
B is overwritten by the m by n solution matrix.
.TP 8
LDB     (local input)           const int
On entry,  LDB  specifies  the  leading  dimension  of  B  as
declared  in  the  calling  (sub) program.  LDB  must  be  at
least MAX(1,m).
.SH EXAMPLE
\fI\&#include "hpl.h"\fR
 
int main(int argc, char *argv[])
.br
{
.br
   double a[2*2], b[2*2];
.br
   a[0] = 4.0; a[1] = 1.0; a[2] = 2.0; a[3] = 5.0;
.br
   b[0] = 2.0; b[1] = 1.0; b[2] = 1.0; b[3] = 2.0;
.br
   HPL_dtrsm( HplColumnMajor, HplLeft, HplUpper,
.br
              HplNoTrans, HplNonUnit, 2, 2, 2.0,
.br
              a, 2, b, 2 );
.br
   printf("  [%f,%f]\en", b[0], b[2]);
.br
   printf("b=[%f,%f]\en", b[1], b[3]);
.br
   exit(0); return(0);
.br
}
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR HPL_dgemm \ (3).
