.TH HPL_pdmxswp 3 "January 20, 2004" "HPL 1.0a" "HPL Library Functions"
.SH NAME
HPL_pdmxswp \- swaps and broacast the pivot row.
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fB\&#include "hpl.h"\fR
 
\fB\&void\fR
\fB\&HPL_pdmxswp(\fR
\fB\&HPL_T_panel *\fR
\fI\&PANEL\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&M\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&II\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&JJ\fR,
\fB\&double *\fR
\fI\&WORK\fR
\fB\&);\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fB\&HPL_pdmxswp\fR
swaps  and  broadcasts  the  absolute value max row using
bi-directional exchange.  The buffer is partially set by HPL_dlocmax.
 
Bi-directional  exchange  is  used  to  perform  the  swap::broadcast
operations  at once  for one column in the panel.  This  results in a
lower number of slightly larger  messages than usual.  On P processes
and assuming bi-directional links,  the running time of this function
can be approximated by
 
   log_2( P ) * ( lat + ( 2 * N0 + 4 ) / bdwth )
 
where  lat and bdwth are the latency and bandwidth of the network for
double precision real elements.  Communication  only  occurs  in  one
process  column. Mono-directional links  will cause the communication
cost to double.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP 8
PANEL   (local input/output)    HPL_T_panel *
On entry,  PANEL  points to the data structure containing the
panel information.
.TP 8
M       (local input)           const int
On entry,  M specifies the local number of rows of the matrix
column on which this function operates.
.TP 8
II      (local input)           const int
On entry, II  specifies the row offset where the column to be
operated on starts with respect to the panel.
.TP 8
JJ      (local input)           const int
On entry, JJ  specifies the column offset where the column to
be operated on starts with respect to the panel.
.TP 8
WORK    (local workspace)       double *
On entry, WORK  is a workarray of size at least 2 * (4+2*N0).
It  is assumed that  HPL_dlocmax  was called  prior  to  this
routine to  initialize  the first four entries of this array.
On exit, the  N0  length max row is stored in WORK[4:4+N0-1];
Note that this is also the  JJth  row  (or column) of L1. The
remaining part is used as a temporary array.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR HPL_dlocmax \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlocswpN \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlocswpT \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdpancrN \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdpancrT \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdpanllN \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdpanllT \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdpanrlN \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdpanrlT \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdrpancrN \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdrpancrT \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdrpanllN \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdrpanllT \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdrpanrlN \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdrpanrlT \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdfact \ (3).
