.TH HPL_pdpanel_init 3 "January 20, 2004" "HPL 1.0a" "HPL Library Functions"
.SH NAME
HPL_pdpanel_init \- Initialize the panel resources.
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fB\&#include "hpl.h"\fR
 
\fB\&void\fR
\fB\&HPL_pdpanel_init(\fR
\fB\&HPL_T_grid *\fR
\fI\&GRID\fR,
\fB\&HPL_T_palg *\fR
\fI\&ALGO\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&M\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&N\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&JB\fR,
\fB\&HPL_T_pmat *\fR
\fI\&A\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&IA\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&JA\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&TAG\fR,
\fB\&HPL_T_panel *\fR
\fI\&PANEL\fR
\fB\&);\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fB\&HPL_pdpanel_init\fR
initializes a panel data structure.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP 8
GRID    (local input)           HPL_T_grid *
On entry,  GRID  points  to the data structure containing the
process grid information.
.TP 8
ALGO    (global input)          HPL_T_palg *
On entry,  ALGO  points to  the data structure containing the
algorithmic parameters.
.TP 8
M       (local input)           const int
On entry, M specifies the global number of rows of the panel.
M must be at least zero.
.TP 8
N       (local input)           const int
On entry,  N  specifies  the  global number of columns of the
panel and trailing submatrix. N must be at least zero.
.TP 8
JB      (global input)          const int
On entry, JB specifies is the number of columns of the panel.
JB must be at least zero.
.TP 8
A       (local input/output)    HPL_T_pmat *
On entry, A points to the data structure containing the local
array information.
.TP 8
IA      (global input)          const int
On entry,  IA  is  the global row index identifying the panel
and trailing submatrix. IA must be at least zero.
.TP 8
JA      (global input)          const int
On entry, JA is the global column index identifying the panel
and trailing submatrix. JA must be at least zero.
.TP 8
TAG     (global input)          const int
On entry, TAG is the row broadcast message id.
.TP 8
PANEL   (local input/output)    HPL_T_panel *
On entry,  PANEL  points to the data structure containing the
panel information.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR HPL_pdpanel_new \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdpanel_disp \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdpanel_free \ (3).
