.TH HPL_dlaswp00N 3 "January 20, 2004" "HPL 1.0a" "HPL Library Functions"
.SH NAME
HPL_dlaswp00N \- performs a series of row interchanges.
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fB\&#include "hpl.h"\fR
 
\fB\&void\fR
\fB\&HPL_dlaswp00N(\fR
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&M\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&N\fR,
\fB\&double *\fR
\fI\&A\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&LDA\fR,
\fB\&const int *\fR
\fI\&IPIV\fR
\fB\&);\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fB\&HPL_dlaswp00N\fR
performs a series of local row interchanges on a matrix
A. One row interchange is initiated for rows 0 through M-1 of A.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP 8
M       (local input)           const int
On entry, M specifies the number of rows of the array A to be
interchanged. M must be at least zero.
.TP 8
N       (local input)           const int
On entry, N  specifies  the number of columns of the array A.
N must be at least zero.
.TP 8
A       (local input/output)    double *
On entry, A  points to an array of dimension (LDA,N) to which
the row interchanges will be  applied.  On exit, the permuted
matrix.
.TP 8
LDA     (local input)           const int
On entry, LDA specifies the leading dimension of the array A.
LDA must be at least MAX(1,M).
.TP 8
IPIV    (local input)           const int *
On entry,  IPIV  is  an  array of size  M  that  contains the
pivoting  information.  For  k  in [0..M),  IPIV[k]=IROFF + l
implies that local rows k and l are to be interchanged.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR HPL_dlaswp00N \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp10N \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp01N \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp01T \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp02N \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp03N \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp03T \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp04N \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp04T \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp05N \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp05T \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp06N \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp06T \ (3).
