.TH HPL_dlamch 3 "January 20, 2004" "HPL 1.0a" "HPL Library Functions"
.SH NAME
HPL_dlamch \- determines machine-specific arithmetic constants.
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fB\&#include "hpl.h"\fR
 
\fB\&double\fR
\fB\&HPL_dlamch(\fR
\fB\&const HPL_T_MACH\fR
\fI\&CMACH\fR
\fB\&);\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fB\&HPL_dlamch\fR
determines  machine-specific  arithmetic constants such as
the relative machine precision  (eps),  the safe minimum (sfmin) such
that 1 / sfmin does not overflow, the base of the machine (base), the
precision (prec), the  number of (base) digits  in the  mantissa (t),
whether rounding occurs in addition (rnd=1.0 and 0.0 otherwise),  the
minimum exponent before  (gradual)  underflow (emin),  the  underflow
threshold (rmin) base**(emin-1), the largest exponent before overflow
(emax), the overflow threshold (rmax) (base**emax)*(1-eps).
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP 8
CMACH   (local input)           const HPL_T_MACH
Specifies the value to be returned by HPL_dlamch             
   = HPL_MACH_EPS,   HPL_dlamch := eps (default)             
   = HPL_MACH_SFMIN, HPL_dlamch := sfmin                     
   = HPL_MACH_BASE,  HPL_dlamch := base                      
   = HPL_MACH_PREC,  HPL_dlamch := eps*base                  
   = HPL_MACH_MLEN,  HPL_dlamch := t                         
   = HPL_MACH_RND,   HPL_dlamch := rnd                       
   = HPL_MACH_EMIN,  HPL_dlamch := emin                      
   = HPL_MACH_RMIN,  HPL_dlamch := rmin                      
   = HPL_MACH_EMAX,  HPL_dlamch := emax                      
   = HPL_MACH_RMAX,  HPL_dlamch := rmax                      
 
where                                                        
 
   eps   = relative machine precision,                       
   sfmin = safe minimum,                                     
   base  = base of the machine,                              
   prec  = eps*base,                                         
   t     = number of digits in the mantissa,                 
   rnd   = 1.0 if rounding occurs in addition,               
   emin  = minimum exponent before underflow,                
   rmin  = underflow threshold,                              
   emax  = largest exponent before overflow,                 
   rmax  = overflow threshold.
.SH EXAMPLE
\fI\&#include "hpl.h"\fR
 
int main(int argc, char *argv[])
.br
{
.br
   double eps;
.br
   eps = HPL_dlamch( HPL_MACH_EPS );
.br
   printf("eps=%18.8e\en", eps);
.br
   exit(0); return(0);
.br
}
.SH REFERENCES
This function has been manually translated from the Fortran 77 LAPACK
auxiliary function dlamch.f  (version 2.0 -- 1992), that  was  itself
based on the function ENVRON  by Malcolm and incorporated suggestions
by Gentleman and Marovich. See                                       
 
Malcolm M. A.,  Algorithms  to  reveal  properties  of floating-point
arithmetic.,  Comms. of the ACM, 15, 949-951 (1972).                 
 
Gentleman W. M. and Marovich S. B.,  More  on algorithms  that reveal
properties of  floating point arithmetic units.,  Comms. of  the ACM,
17, 276-277 (1974).
