.TH HPL_sdrv 3 "January 20, 2004" "HPL 1.0a" "HPL Library Functions"
.SH NAME
HPL_sdrv \- Send and receive a message.
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fB\&#include "hpl.h"\fR
 
\fB\&int\fR
\fB\&HPL_sdrv(\fR
\fB\&double *\fR
\fI\&SBUF\fR,
\fB\&int\fR
\fI\&SCOUNT\fR,
\fB\&int\fR
\fI\&STAG\fR,
\fB\&double *\fR
\fI\&RBUF\fR,
\fB\&int\fR
\fI\&RCOUNT\fR,
\fB\&int\fR
\fI\&RTAG\fR,
\fB\&int\fR
\fI\&PARTNER\fR,
\fB\&MPI_Comm\fR
\fI\&COMM\fR
\fB\&);\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fB\&HPL_sdrv\fR
is a simple wrapper around MPI_Sendrecv. Its main purpose is
to allow for some experimentation and tuning of this simple function.
Messages  of  length  less than  or  equal to zero  are not sent  nor
received.  Successful completion  is  indicated by the returned error
code HPL_SUCCESS.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP 8
SBUF    (local input)           double *
On entry, SBUF specifies the starting address of buffer to be
sent.
.TP 8
SCOUNT  (local input)           int
On entry,  SCOUNT  specifies  the number  of double precision
entries in SBUF. SCOUNT must be at least zero.
.TP 8
STAG    (local input)           int
On entry,  STAG  specifies the message tag to be used for the
sending communication operation.
.TP 8
RBUF    (local output)          double *
On entry, RBUF specifies the starting address of buffer to be
received.
.TP 8
RCOUNT  (local input)           int
On entry,  RCOUNT  specifies  the number  of double precision
entries in RBUF. RCOUNT must be at least zero.
.TP 8
RTAG    (local input)           int
On entry,  RTAG  specifies the message tag to be used for the
receiving communication operation.
.TP 8
PARTNER (local input)           int
On entry,  PARTNER  specifies  the rank of the  collaborative
process in the communication space defined by COMM.
.TP 8
COMM    (local input)           MPI_Comm
The MPI communicator identifying the communication space.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR HPL_send \ (3),
.BR HPL_recv \ (3).
