.TH HPL_dlocmax 3 "January 20, 2004" "HPL 1.0a" "HPL Library Functions"
.SH NAME
HPL_dlocmax \- finds the maximum entry in matrix column.
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fB\&#include "hpl.h"\fR
 
\fB\&void\fR
\fB\&HPL_dlocmax(\fR
\fB\&HPL_T_panel *\fR
\fI\&PANEL\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&N\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&II\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&JJ\fR,
\fB\&double *\fR
\fI\&WORK\fR
\fB\&);\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fB\&HPL_dlocmax\fR
finds  the maximum entry in the current column  and packs
the useful information in  WORK[0:3].  On exit,  WORK[0] contains the
local maximum  absolute value  scalar,  WORK[1] is the  corresponding
local row index,  WORK[2]  is the corresponding global row index, and
WORK[3] is the coordinate of the process owning this max.  When N  is
less than 1, the WORK[0:2] is initialized to zero, and WORK[3] is set
to the total number of process rows.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP 8
PANEL   (local input/output)    HPL_T_panel *
On entry,  PANEL  points to the data structure containing the
panel information.
.TP 8
N       (local input)           const int
On entry,  N specifies the local number of rows of the column
of A on which we operate.
.TP 8
II      (local input)           const int
On entry, II  specifies the row offset where the column to be
operated on starts with respect to the panel.
.TP 8
JJ      (local input)           const int
On entry, JJ  specifies the column offset where the column to
be operated on starts with respect to the panel.
.TP 8
WORK    (local workspace)       double *
On entry, WORK  is  a workarray of size at least 4.  On exit,
WORK[0] contains  the  local  maximum  absolute value scalar,
WORK[1] contains  the corresponding local row index,  WORK[2]
contains the corresponding global row index, and  WORK[3]  is
the coordinate of process owning this max.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR HPL_dlocswpN \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlocswpT \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdmxswp \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdpancrN \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdpancrT \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdpanllN \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdpanllT \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdpanrlN \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdpanrlT \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdrpancrN \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdrpancrT \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdrpanllN \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdrpanllT \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdrpanrlN \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdrpanrlT \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdfact \ (3).
