.TH HPL_dlocswpT 3 "January 20, 2004" "HPL 1.0a" "HPL Library Functions"
.SH NAME
HPL_dlocswpT \- locally swaps rows within panel.
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fB\&#include "hpl.h"\fR
 
\fB\&void\fR
\fB\&HPL_dlocswpT(\fR
\fB\&HPL_T_panel *\fR
\fI\&PANEL\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&II\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&JJ\fR,
\fB\&double *\fR
\fI\&WORK\fR
\fB\&);\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fB\&HPL_dlocswpT\fR
performs  the local swapping operations  within a panel.
The lower triangular  N0-by-N0  upper block of the panel is stored in
transpose form.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP 8
PANEL   (local input/output)    HPL_T_panel *
On entry,  PANEL  points to the data structure containing the
panel information.
.TP 8
II      (local input)           const int
On entry, II  specifies the row offset where the column to be
operated on starts with respect to the panel.
.TP 8
JJ      (local input)           const int
On entry, JJ  specifies the column offset where the column to
be operated on starts with respect to the panel.
.TP 8
WORK    (local workspace)       double *
On entry, WORK  is a workarray of size at least 2 * (4+2*N0).
WORK[0] contains  the  local  maximum  absolute value scalar,
WORK[1] contains  the corresponding local row index,  WORK[2]
contains the corresponding global row index, and  WORK[3]  is
the coordinate of process owning this max.  The N0 length max
row is stored in WORK[4:4+N0-1];  Note  that this is also the
JJth row  (or column) of L1. The remaining part of this array
is used as workspace.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR HPL_dlocmax \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlocswpN \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdmxswp \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdpancrN \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdpancrT \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdpanllN \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdpanllT \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdpanrlN \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdpanrlT \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdrpancrN \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdrpancrT \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdrpanllN \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdrpanllT \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdrpanrlN \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdrpanrlT \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdfact \ (3).
