.TH HPL_infog2l 3 "January 20, 2004" "HPL 1.0a" "HPL Library Functions"
.SH NAME
HPL_infog2l \- global to local index translation.
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fB\&#include "hpl.h"\fR
 
\fB\&void\fR
\fB\&HPL_infog2l(\fR
\fB\&int\fR
\fI\&I\fR,
\fB\&int\fR
\fI\&J\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&IMB\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&MB\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&INB\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&NB\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&RSRC\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&CSRC\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&MYROW\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&MYCOL\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&NPROW\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&NPCOL\fR,
\fB\&int *\fR
\fI\&II\fR,
\fB\&int *\fR
\fI\&JJ\fR,
\fB\&int *\fR
\fI\&PROW\fR,
\fB\&int *\fR
\fI\&PCOL\fR
\fB\&);\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fB\&HPL_infog2l\fR
computes the starting local index II, JJ corresponding to
the submatrix starting globally at the entry pointed by  I,  J.  This
routine returns the coordinates in the grid of the process owning the
matrix entry of global indexes I, J, namely PROW and PCOL.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP 8
I       (global input)          int
On entry,  I  specifies  the  global  row index of the matrix
entry. I must be at least zero.
.TP 8
J       (global input)          int
On entry,  J  specifies the global column index of the matrix
entry. J must be at least zero.
.TP 8
IMB     (global input)          const int
On entry,  IMB  specifies  the size of the first row block of
the global matrix. IMB must be at least one.
.TP 8
MB      (global input)          const int
On entry,  MB specifies the blocking factor used to partition
and  distribute the rows of the matrix A.  MB  must be larger
than one.
.TP 8
INB     (global input)          const int
On entry, INB specifies the size of the first column block of
the global matrix. INB must be at least one.
.TP 8
NB      (global input)          const int
On entry,  NB specifies the blocking factor used to partition
and distribute the columns of the matrix A. NB must be larger
than one.
.TP 8
RSRC    (global input)          const int
On entry,  RSRC  specifies  the row coordinate of the process
that possesses the row  I.  RSRC  must  be at least zero  and
strictly less than NPROW.
.TP 8
CSRC    (global input)          const int
On entry, CSRC specifies the column coordinate of the process
that possesses the column J. CSRC  must be at least zero  and
strictly less than NPCOL.
.TP 8
MYROW   (local input)           const int
On entry, MYROW  specifies my  row process  coordinate in the
grid. MYROW is greater than or equal  to zero  and  less than
NPROW.
.TP 8
MYCOL   (local input)           const int
On entry, MYCOL specifies my column process coordinate in the
grid. MYCOL is greater than or equal  to zero  and  less than
NPCOL.
.TP 8
NPROW   (global input)          const int
On entry,  NPROW  specifies the number of process rows in the
grid. NPROW is at least one.
.TP 8
NPCOL   (global input)          const int
On entry,  NPCOL  specifies  the number of process columns in
the grid. NPCOL is at least one.
.TP 8
II      (local output)          int *
On exit, II  specifies the  local  starting  row index of the
submatrix. On exit, II is at least 0.
.TP 8
JJ      (local output)          int *
On exit, JJ  specifies the local starting column index of the
submatrix. On exit, JJ is at least 0.
.TP 8
PROW    (global output)         int *
On exit, PROW is the row coordinate of the process owning the
entry specified by the global index I.  PROW is at least zero
and less than NPROW.
.TP 8
PCOL    (global output)         int *
On exit, PCOL  is the column coordinate of the process owning
the entry specified by the global index J.  PCOL  is at least
zero and less than NPCOL.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR HPL_indxg2l \ (3),
.BR HPL_indxg2p \ (3),
.BR HPL_indxl2g \ (3),
.BR HPL_numroc \ (3),
.BR HPL_numrocI \ (3).
