.TH HPL_rollN 3 "January 20, 2004" "HPL 1.0a" "HPL Library Functions"
.SH NAME
HPL_rollN \- Roll U and forward the column panel.
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fB\&#include "hpl.h"\fR
 
\fB\&void\fR
\fB\&HPL_rollN(\fR
\fB\&HPL_T_panel *\fR
\fI\&PBCST\fR,
\fB\&int *\fR
\fI\&IFLAG\fR,
\fB\&HPL_T_panel *\fR
\fI\&PANEL\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&N\fR,
\fB\&double *\fR
\fI\&U\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&LDU\fR,
\fB\&const int *\fR
\fI\&IPLEN\fR,
\fB\&const int *\fR
\fI\&IPMAP\fR,
\fB\&const int *\fR
\fI\&IPMAPM1\fR
\fB\&);\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fB\&HPL_rollN\fR
rolls the local arrays containing the local pieces of U, so
that on exit to this function  U  is replicated in every process row.
In addition, this function probe for the presence of the column panel
and forwards it when available.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP 8
PBCST   (local input/output)    HPL_T_panel *
On entry,  PBCST  points to the data structure containing the
panel (to be broadcast) information.
.TP 8
IFLAG   (local input/output)    int *
On entry, IFLAG  indicates  whether or not  the broadcast has
already been completed.  If not,  probing will occur, and the
outcome will be contained in IFLAG on exit.
.TP 8
PANEL   (local input/output)    HPL_T_panel *
On entry,  PANEL  points to the data structure containing the
panel (to be rolled) information.
.TP 8
N       (local input)           const int
On entry, N specifies the number of columns of  U.  N must be
at least zero.
.TP 8
U       (local input/output)    double *
On entry,  U  is an array of dimension (LDU,*) containing the
local pieces of U in each process row.
.TP 8
LDU     (local input)           const int
On entry, LDU specifies the local leading dimension of U. LDU
should be at least  MAX(1,IPLEN[NPROW]).
.TP 8
IPLEN   (global input)          const int *
On entry, IPLEN is an array of dimension NPROW+1.  This array
is such that IPLEN[i+1] - IPLEN[i] is the number of rows of U
in each process row.
.TP 8
IPMAP   (global input)          const int *
On entry, IMAP  is an array of dimension  NPROW.  This  array
contains  the  logarithmic mapping of the processes. In other
words,  IMAP[myrow]  is the absolute coordinate of the sorted
process.
.TP 8
IPMAPM1 (global input)          const int *
On entry,  IMAPM1  is an array of dimension NPROW. This array
contains  the inverse of the logarithmic mapping contained in
IMAP: For i in [0.. NPROW) IMAPM1[IMAP[i]] = i.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR HPL_pdlaswp01N \ (3).
