.TH HPL_dlaswp04N 3 "January 20, 2004" "HPL 1.0a" "HPL Library Functions"
.SH NAME
HPL_dlaswp04N \- copy rows of U in A and replace them with columns of W.
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fB\&#include "hpl.h"\fR
 
\fB\&void\fR
\fB\&HPL_dlaswp04N(\fR
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&M0\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&M1\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&N\fR,
\fB\&double *\fR
\fI\&U\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&LDU\fR,
\fB\&double *\fR
\fI\&A\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&LDA\fR,
\fB\&const double *\fR
\fI\&W0\fR,
\fB\&const double *\fR
\fI\&W\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&LDW\fR,
\fB\&const int *\fR
\fI\&LINDXA\fR,
\fB\&const int *\fR
\fI\&LINDXAU\fR
\fB\&);\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fB\&HPL_dlaswp04N\fR
copies M0 rows of U into A and replaces those rows of U
with columns of W. In addition M1 - M0 columns of  W  are copied into
rows of U.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP 8
M0      (local input)           const int
On entry, M0 specifies the number of rows of U that should be
copied into  A  and replaced by columns of  W.  M0 must be at
least zero.
.TP 8
M1      (local input)           const int
On entry, M1 specifies the number of columns of W that should
be copied into rows of U. M1 must be at least zero.
.TP 8
N       (local input)           const int
On entry, N specifies the length of the rows of U that should
be copied into A. N must be at least zero.
.TP 8
U       (local input/output)    double *
On entry,  U  points to  an array of dimension (LDU,N).  This
array contains the rows that are to be copied into A.
.TP 8
LDU     (local input)           const int
On entry, LDU specifies the leading dimension of the array U.
LDU must be at least MAX(1,M1).
.TP 8
A       (local output)          double *
On entry, A points to an array of dimension (LDA,N). On exit,
the  rows of this array specified by  LINDXA  are replaced by
rows of U indicated by LINDXAU.
.TP 8
LDA     (local input)           const int
On entry, LDA specifies the leading dimension of the array A.
LDA must be at least MAX(1,M0).
.TP 8
W0      (local input)           const double *
On entry,  W0  is an array of size (M-1)*LDW+1, that contains
the destination offset  in U where the columns of W should be
copied.
.TP 8
W       (local input)           const double *
On entry, W  is an array of size (LDW,M0+M1),  that  contains
data to be copied into U.  For i in [M0..M0+M1),  the entries
W(:,i) are copied into the row W0(i*LDW) of U.
.TP 8
LDW     (local input)           const int
On entry, LDW specifies the leading dimension of the array W.
LDW must be at least MAX(1,N+1).
.TP 8
LINDXA  (local input)           const int *
On entry, LINDXA  is an array of dimension  M0 containing the
local row indexes A into which rows of U are copied.
.TP 8
LINDXAU (local input)           const int *
On entry, LINDXAU  is an array of dimension M0 that  contains
the local  row indexes of  U that should be copied into A and
replaced by the columns of W.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR HPL_dlaswp00N \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp10N \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp01N \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp01T \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp02N \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp03N \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp03T \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp04N \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp04T \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp05N \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp05T \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp06N \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp06T \ (3).
