.TH HPL_plindx0 3 "January 20, 2004" "HPL 1.0a" "HPL Library Functions"
.SH NAME
HPL_plindx0 \- Compute local swapping index arrays.
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fB\&#include "hpl.h"\fR
 
\fB\&void\fR
\fB\&HPL_plindx0(\fR
\fB\&HPL_T_panel *\fR
\fI\&PANEL\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&K\fR,
\fB\&int *\fR
\fI\&IPID\fR,
\fB\&int *\fR
\fI\&LINDXA\fR,
\fB\&int *\fR
\fI\&LINDXAU\fR,
\fB\&int *\fR
\fI\&LLEN\fR
\fB\&);\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fB\&HPL_plindx0\fR
computes two local arrays  LINDXA and  LINDXAU  containing
the  local  source and final destination position  resulting from the
application of row interchanges.
 
On entry, the array  IPID  of length K is such that the row of global
index  IPID(i)  should be mapped onto row of global index  IPID(i+1).
Let  IA  be the global index of the first row to be swapped. For k in
[0..K/2), the row of global index IPID(2*k) should be mapped onto the
row of global index  IPID(2*k+1).  The question then, is to determine
which rows should ultimately be part of U.
 
First, some rows of the process ICURROW  may be swapped locally.  One
of this row belongs to U, the other one belongs to my local  piece of
A.  The other  rows of the current block are swapped with remote rows
and are thus not part of U. These rows however should be sent  along,
and  grabbed by the other processes  as we  progress in the  exchange
phase.
 
So, assume that I am  ICURROW  and consider a row of index  IPID(2*i)
that I own. If I own IPID(2*i+1) as well and IPID(2*i+1) - IA is less
than N,  this row is locally swapped and should be copied into  U  at
the position IPID(2*i+1) - IA. No row will be exchanged for this one.
If IPID(2*i+1)-IA is greater than N, then the row IPID(2*i) should be
locally copied into my local piece of A at the position corresponding
to the row of global index IPID(2*i+1).
 
If the process  ICURROW does not own  IPID(2*i+1), then row IPID(2*i)
is to be swapped away and strictly speaking does not belong to U, but
to  A  remotely.  Since this  process will however send this array U,
this row is  copied into  U, exactly where the row IPID(2*i+1) should
go. For this, we search IPID for k1, such that IPID(2*k1) is equal to
IPID(2*i+1); and row  IPID(2*i) is to be copied in U  at the position
IPID(2*k1+1)-IA.
 
It is thus  important to put the rows that go into U, i.e., such that
IPID(2*i+1) - IA is less than N at the begining of the array IPID. By
doing so,  U  is formed, and the local copy  is performed in just one
sweep.
 
Two lists  LINDXA  and  LINDXAU are built.  LINDXA contains the local
index of the rows I have that should be copied. LINDXAU  contains the
local destination information: if LINDXAU(k) >= 0, row LINDXA(k) of A
is to be copied in U at position LINDXAU(k). Otherwise, row LINDXA(k)
of A should be locally copied into A(-LINDXAU(k),:).  In the  process
ICURROW, the initial packing algorithm proceeds as follows.
 
  for all entries in IPID,
     if IPID(2*i) is in ICURROW,
        if IPID(2*i+1) is in ICURROW,
           if( IPID(2*i+1) - IA < N )
            save corresponding local position
            of this row (LINDXA);
            save local position (LINDXAU) in U
            where this row goes;
            [copy row IPID(2*i) in U at position
            IPID(2*i+1)-IA; ];
           else
            save corresponding local position of
            this row (LINDXA);
            save local position (-LINDXAU) in A
            where this row goes;
            [copy row IPID(2*i) in my piece of A
            at IPID(2*i+1);]
           end if
        else
           find k1 such that IPID(2*k1) = IPID(2*i+1);
           copy row IPID(2*i) in U at position
           IPID(2*k1+1)-IA;
           save corresponding local position of this
           row (LINDXA);
           save local position (LINDXAU) in U where
           this row goes;
        end if
     end if
  end for
 
Second, if I am not the current row process  ICURROW, all source rows
in IPID that I own are part of U. Indeed,  they  are swapped with one
row  of  the  current  block  of rows,  and  the  main  factorization
algorithm proceeds one row after each other.  The processes different
from ICURROW,  should  exchange and accumulate  those rows until they
receive some data previously owned by the process ICURROW.
 
In processes different from  ICURROW,  the  initial packing algorithm
proceeds as follows.  Consider a row of global index IPID(2*i) that I
own. When I will be receiving data previously owned by ICURROW, i.e.,
U, row IPID(2*i) should  replace the row in U at pos. IPID(2*i+1)-IA,
and  this particular row of U should be first copied into my piece of
A, at A(il,:),  where  il is the  local row  index  corresponding  to
IPID(2*i). Now,initially, this row will be packed into workspace, say
as the kth row of  that  work array.  The  following  algorithm  sets
LINDXAU[k] to IPID(2*i+1)-IA, that is the position in U where the row
should be copied. LINDXA(k) stores the local index in  A  where  this
row of U should be copied, i.e il.
 
  for all entries in IPID,
     if IPID(2*i) is not in ICURROW,
        copy row IPID(2*i) in work array;
        save corresponding local position
        of this row (LINDXA);
        save position (LINDXAU) in U where
        this row should be copied;
     end if
  end for
 
Since we are at it, we also globally figure  out  how many rows every
process has. That is necessary, because it would rather be cumbersome
to  figure it on  the fly  during the  bi-directional exchange phase.
This information is kept in the array  LLEN  of size NPROW. Also note
that the arrays LINDXA and LINDXAU are of max length equal to 2*N.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP 8
PANEL   (local input/output)    HPL_T_panel *
On entry,  PANEL  points to the data structure containing the
panel information.
.TP 8
K       (global input)          const int
On entry, K specifies the number of entries in IPID.  K is at
least 2*N, and at most 4*N.
.TP 8
IPID    (global input)          int *
On entry,  IPID  is an array of length K. The first K entries
of that array contain the src and final destination resulting
from the application of the interchanges.
.TP 8
LINDXA  (local output)          int *
On entry, LINDXA  is an array of dimension 2*N. On exit, this
array contains the local indexes of the rows of A I have that
should be copied into U.
.TP 8
LINDXAU (local output)          int *
On exit, LINDXAU  is an array of dimension 2*N. On exit, this
array contains  the local destination  information encoded as
follows.  If LINDXAU(k) >= 0, row  LINDXA(k)  of A  is  to be
copied in U at position LINDXAU(k).  Otherwise, row LINDXA(k)
of A should be locally copied into A(-LINDXAU(k),:).
.TP 8
LLEN    (global output)         int *
On entry,  LLEN  is  an array  of length  NPROW.  On exit, it
contains how many rows every process has.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR HPL_pdlaswp00N \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdlaswp00T \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdlaswp01N \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdlaswp01T \ (3).
