.TH HPL_dlaswp02N 3 "January 20, 2004" "HPL 1.0a" "HPL Library Functions"
.SH NAME
HPL_dlaswp02N \- pack rows of A into columns of W.
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fB\&#include "hpl.h"\fR
 
\fB\&void\fR
\fB\&HPL_dlaswp02N(\fR
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&M\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&N\fR,
\fB\&const double *\fR
\fI\&A\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&LDA\fR,
\fB\&double *\fR
\fI\&W0\fR,
\fB\&double *\fR
\fI\&W\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&LDW\fR,
\fB\&const int *\fR
\fI\&LINDXA\fR,
\fB\&const int *\fR
\fI\&LINDXAU\fR
\fB\&);\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fB\&HPL_dlaswp02N\fR
packs scattered rows of an array  A  into workspace  W.
The row offsets in A are specified by LINDXA.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP 8
M       (local input)           const int
On entry, M  specifies the number of rows of A that should be
copied into W. M must be at least zero.
.TP 8
N       (local input)           const int
On entry, N  specifies the length of rows of A that should be
copied into W. N must be at least zero.
.TP 8
A       (local input)           const double *
On entry, A points to an array of dimension (LDA,N). The rows
of this array specified by LINDXA should be copied into W.
.TP 8
LDA     (local input)           const int
On entry, LDA specifies the leading dimension of the array A.
LDA must be at least MAX(1,M).
.TP 8
W0      (local input/output)    double *
On exit,  W0  is  an array of size (M-1)*LDW+1, that contains
the destination offset  in U where the columns of W should be
copied.
.TP 8
W       (local output)          double *
On entry, W  is an array of size (LDW,M). On exit, W contains
the  rows LINDXA[i] for i in [0..M) of A stored  contiguously
in W(:,i).
.TP 8
LDW     (local input)           const int
On entry, LDW specifies the leading dimension of the array W.
LDW must be at least MAX(1,N+1).
.TP 8
LINDXA  (local input)           const int *
On entry, LINDXA is an array of dimension M that contains the
local row indexes of A that should be copied into W.
.TP 8
LINDXAU (local input)           const int *
On entry, LINDXAU  is an array of dimension M  that  contains
the local  row indexes of  U that should be copied into A and
replaced by the rows of W.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR HPL_dlaswp00N \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp10N \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp01N \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp01T \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp02N \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp03N \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp03T \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp04N \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp04T \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp05N \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp05T \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp06N \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp06T \ (3).
