.TH HPL_pdmatgen 3 "January 20, 2004" "HPL 1.0a" "HPL Library Functions"
.SH NAME
HPL_pdmatgen \- Parallel random matrix generator.
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fB\&#include "hpl.h"\fR
 
\fB\&void\fR
\fB\&HPL_pdmatgen(\fR
\fB\&const HPL_T_grid *\fR
\fI\&GRID\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&M\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&N\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&NB\fR,
\fB\&double *\fR
\fI\&A\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&LDA\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&ISEED\fR
\fB\&);\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fB\&HPL_pdmatgen\fR
generates (or regenerates) a parallel random matrix A.
 
The  pseudo-random  generator uses the linear congruential algorithm:
X(n+1) = (a * X(n) + c) mod m  as  described  in the  Art of Computer
Programming, Knuth 1973, Vol. 2.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP 8
GRID    (local input)           const HPL_T_grid *
On entry,  GRID  points  to the data structure containing the
process grid information.
.TP 8
M       (global input)          const int
On entry,  M  specifies  the number  of rows of the matrix A.
M must be at least zero.
.TP 8
N       (global input)          const int
On entry,  N specifies the number of columns of the matrix A.
N must be at least zero.
.TP 8
NB      (global input)          const int
On entry,  NB specifies the blocking factor used to partition
and distribute the matrix A. NB must be larger than one.
.TP 8
A       (local output)          double *
On entry,  A  points  to an array of dimension (LDA,LocQ(N)).
On exit, this array contains the coefficients of the randomly
generated matrix.
.TP 8
LDA     (local input)           const int
On entry, LDA specifies the leading dimension of the array A.
LDA must be at least max(1,LocP(M)).
.TP 8
ISEED   (global input)          const int
On entry, ISEED  specifies  the  seed  number to generate the
matrix A. ISEED must be at least zero.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR HPL_ladd \ (3),
.BR HPL_lmul \ (3),
.BR HPL_setran \ (3),
.BR HPL_xjumpm \ (3),
.BR HPL_jumpit \ (3),
.BR HPL_drand \ (3).
