.TH HPL_perm 3 "January 20, 2004" "HPL 1.0a" "HPL Library Functions"
.SH NAME
HPL_perm \- Combine 2 index arrays - Generate the permutation.
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fB\&#include "hpl.h"\fR
 
\fB\&void\fR
\fB\&HPL_perm(\fR
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&N\fR,
\fB\&int *\fR
\fI\&LINDXA\fR,
\fB\&int *\fR
\fI\&LINDXAU\fR,
\fB\&int *\fR
\fI\&IWORK\fR
\fB\&);\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fB\&HPL_perm\fR
combines  two  index  arrays  and generate the corresponding
permutation. First, this function computes the inverse of LINDXA, and
then combine it with LINDXAU.  Second, in order to be able to perform
the permutation in place,  LINDXAU  is overwritten by the sequence of
permutation  producing  the  same result.  What we ultimately want to
achieve is:  U[LINDXAU[i]] := U[LINDXA[i]] for i in [0..N). After the
call to this function,  this in place permutation can be performed by
for i in [0..N) swap U[i] with U[LINDXAU[i]].
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP 8
N       (global input)          const int
On entry,  N  specifies the length of the arrays  LINDXA  and
LINDXAU. N should be at least zero.
.TP 8
LINDXA  (global input/output)   int *
On entry,  LINDXA  is an array of dimension N  containing the
source indexes. On exit,  LINDXA  contains the combined index
array.
.TP 8
LINDXAU (global input/output)   int *
On entry,  LINDXAU is an array of dimension N  containing the
target indexes.  On exit,  LINDXAU  contains  the sequence of
permutation,  that  should be applied  in increasing order to
permute the underlying array U in place.
.TP 8
IWORK   (workspace)             int *
On entry, IWORK is a workarray of dimension N.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR HPL_plindx1 \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdlaswp01N \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdlaswp01T \ (3).
