.TH HPL_pdrpanllN 3 "January 20, 2004" "HPL 1.0a" "HPL Library Functions"
.SH NAME
HPL_pdrpanllN \- Left-looking recursive panel factorization.
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fB\&#include "hpl.h"\fR
 
\fB\&void\fR
\fB\&HPL_pdrpanllN(\fR
\fB\&HPL_T_panel *\fR
\fI\&PANEL\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&M\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&N\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&ICOFF\fR,
\fB\&double *\fR
\fI\&WORK\fR
\fB\&);\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fB\&HPL_pdrpanllN\fR
recursively  factorizes  a panel  of columns using  the
recursive Left-looking variant of the one-dimensional algorithm.  The
lower triangular  N0-by-N0  upper block  of  the  panel  is stored in
no-transpose form (i.e. just like the input matrix itself).
 
Bi-directional  exchange  is  used  to  perform  the  swap::broadcast
operations  at once  for one column in the panel.  This  results in a
lower number of slightly larger  messages than usual.  On P processes
and assuming bi-directional links,  the running time of this function
can be approximated by (when N is equal to N0):                      
 
   N0 * log_2( P ) * ( lat + ( 2*N0 + 4 ) / bdwth ) +
   N0^2 * ( M - N0/3 ) * gam2-3
 
where M is the local number of rows of  the panel, lat and bdwth  are
the latency and bandwidth of the network for  double  precision  real
words,  and  gam2-3  is an estimate of the  Level 2 and Level 3  BLAS
rate of execution. The  recursive  algorithm  allows indeed to almost
achieve  Level 3 BLAS  performance  in the panel factorization.  On a
large  number of modern machines,  this  operation is however latency
bound,  meaning  that its cost can  be estimated  by only the latency
portion N0 * log_2(P) * lat.  Mono-directional links will double this
communication cost.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP 8
PANEL   (local input/output)    HPL_T_panel *
On entry,  PANEL  points to the data structure containing the
panel information.
.TP 8
M       (local input)           const int
On entry,  M specifies the local number of rows of sub(A).
.TP 8
N       (local input)           const int
On entry,  N specifies the local number of columns of sub(A).
.TP 8
ICOFF   (global input)          const int
On entry, ICOFF specifies the row and column offset of sub(A)
in A.
.TP 8
WORK    (local workspace)       double *
On entry, WORK  is a workarray of size at least 2*(4+2*N0).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR HPL_dlocmax \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlocswpN \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlocswpT \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdmxswp \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdpancrN \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdpancrT \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdpanllN \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdpanllT \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdpanrlN \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdpanrlT \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdrpancrN \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdrpancrT \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdrpanllT \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdrpanrlN \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdrpanrlT \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdfact \ (3).
