.TH HPL_dlaswp10N 3 "January 20, 2004" "HPL 1.0a" "HPL Library Functions"
.SH NAME
HPL_dlaswp10N \- performs a series column interchanges.
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fB\&#include "hpl.h"\fR
 
\fB\&void\fR
\fB\&HPL_dlaswp10N(\fR
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&M\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&N\fR,
\fB\&double *\fR
\fI\&A\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&LDA\fR,
\fB\&const int *\fR
\fI\&IPIV\fR
\fB\&);\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fB\&HPL_dlaswp10N\fR
performs a sequence  of  local column interchanges on a
matrix A.  One column interchange is initiated  for columns 0 through
N-1 of A.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP 8
M       (local input)           const int
__arg0__
.TP 8
N       (local input)           const int
On entry,  M  specifies  the number of rows of the array A. M
must be at least zero.
.TP 8
A       (local input/output)    double *
On entry, N specifies the number of columns of the array A. N
must be at least zero.
.TP 8
LDA     (local input)           const int
On entry, A  points to an  array of  dimension (LDA,N).  This
array contains the columns onto which the interchanges should
be applied. On exit, A contains the permuted matrix.
.TP 8
IPIV    (local input)           const int *
On entry, LDA specifies the leading dimension of the array A.
LDA must be at least MAX(1,M).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR HPL_dlaswp00N \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp10N \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp01N \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp01T \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp02N \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp03N \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp03T \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp04N \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp04T \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp05N \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp05T \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp06N \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp06T \ (3).
