.TH HPL_pdlange 3 "January 20, 2004" "HPL 1.0a" "HPL Library Functions"
.SH NAME
HPL_pdlange \- Compute ||A||.
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fB\&#include "hpl.h"\fR
 
\fB\&double\fR
\fB\&HPL_pdlange(\fR
\fB\&const HPL_T_grid *\fR
\fI\&GRID\fR,
\fB\&const HPL_T_NORM\fR
\fI\&NORM\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&M\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&N\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&NB\fR,
\fB\&const double *\fR
\fI\&A\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&LDA\fR
\fB\&);\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fB\&HPL_pdlange\fR
returns  the value of the one norm,  or the infinity norm,
or the element of largest absolute value of a distributed matrix A:  
 
 
   max(abs(A(i,j))) when NORM = HPL_NORM_A,                          
   norm1(A),        when NORM = HPL_NORM_1,                          
   normI(A),        when NORM = HPL_NORM_I,                          
 
where norm1 denotes the one norm of a matrix (maximum column sum) and
normI denotes  the infinity norm of a matrix (maximum row sum).  Note
that max(abs(A(i,j))) is not a matrix norm.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP 8
GRID    (local input)           const HPL_T_grid *
On entry,  GRID  points  to the data structure containing the
process grid information.
.TP 8
NORM    (global input)          const HPL_T_NORM
On entry,  NORM  specifies  the  value to be returned by this
function as described above.
.TP 8
M       (global input)          const int
On entry,  M  specifies  the number  of rows of the matrix A.
M must be at least zero.
.TP 8
N       (global input)          const int
On entry,  N specifies the number of columns of the matrix A.
N must be at least zero.
.TP 8
NB      (global input)          const int
On entry,  NB specifies the blocking factor used to partition
and distribute the matrix. NB must be larger than one.
.TP 8
A       (local input)           const double *
On entry,  A  points to an array of dimension  (LDA,LocQ(N)),
that contains the local pieces of the distributed matrix A.
.TP 8
LDA     (local input)           const int
On entry, LDA specifies the leading dimension of the array A.
LDA must be at least max(1,LocP(M)).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR HPL_pdlaprnt \ (3),
.BR HPL_fprintf \ (3).
