.TH HPL_equil 3 "January 20, 2004" "HPL 1.0a" "HPL Library Functions"
.SH NAME
HPL_equil \- Equilibrate U and forward the column panel L.
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fB\&#include "hpl.h"\fR
 
\fB\&void\fR
\fB\&HPL_equil(\fR
\fB\&HPL_T_panel *\fR
\fI\&PBCST\fR,
\fB\&int *\fR
\fI\&IFLAG\fR,
\fB\&HPL_T_panel *\fR
\fI\&PANEL\fR,
\fB\&const enum HPL_TRANS\fR
\fI\&TRANS\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&N\fR,
\fB\&double *\fR
\fI\&U\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&LDU\fR,
\fB\&int *\fR
\fI\&IPLEN\fR,
\fB\&const int *\fR
\fI\&IPMAP\fR,
\fB\&const int *\fR
\fI\&IPMAPM1\fR,
\fB\&int *\fR
\fI\&IWORK\fR
\fB\&);\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fB\&HPL_equil\fR
equilibrates  the  local  pieces  of U, so that on exit to
this function, pieces of U contained in every process row are of the
same size. This phase makes the rolling phase optimal.  In addition,
this  function probes  for  the  column panel L and forwards it when
possible.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP 8
PBCST   (local input/output)    HPL_T_panel *
On entry,  PBCST  points to the data structure containing the
panel (to be broadcast) information.
.TP 8
IFLAG   (local input/output)    int *
On entry, IFLAG  indicates  whether or not  the broadcast has
already been completed.  If not,  probing will occur, and the
outcome will be contained in IFLAG on exit.
.TP 8
PANEL   (local input/output)    HPL_T_panel *
On entry,  PANEL  points to the data structure containing the
panel (to be equilibrated) information.
.TP 8
TRANS   (global input)          const enum HPL_TRANS
On entry, TRANS specifies whether  U  is stored in transposed
or non-transposed form.
.TP 8
N       (local input)           const int
On entry, N  specifies the number of rows or columns of  U. N
must be at least 0.
.TP 8
U       (local input/output)    double *
On entry,  U  is an array of dimension (LDU,*) containing the
local pieces of U in each process row.
.TP 8
LDU     (local input)           const int
On entry, LDU specifies the local leading dimension of U. LDU
should be at least MAX(1,IPLEN[nprow]) when  U  is stored  in
non-transposed form, and MAX(1,N) otherwise.
.TP 8
IPLEN   (global input)          int *
On entry, IPLEN is an array of dimension NPROW+1.  This array
is such that IPLEN[i+1] - IPLEN[i] is the number of rows of U
in process IPMAP[i].
.TP 8
IPMAP   (global input)          const int *
On entry, IPMAP is an array of dimension  NPROW.  This  array
contains  the  logarithmic mapping of the processes. In other
words, IPMAP[myrow]  is the absolute coordinate of the sorted
process.
.TP 8
IPMAPM1 (global input)          const int *
On entry, IPMAPM1  is an array of dimension NPROW. This array
contains  the inverse of the logarithmic mapping contained in
IPMAP: For i in [0.. NPROCS) IPMAPM1[IPMAP[i]] = i.
.TP 8
IWORK   (workspace)             int *
On entry, IWORK is a workarray of dimension NPROW+1.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR HPL_pdlaswp01N \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdlaswp01T \ (3).
