.TH HPL_dlaswp03N 3 "January 20, 2004" "HPL 1.0a" "HPL Library Functions"
.SH NAME
HPL_dlaswp03N \- copy rows of W into U.
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fB\&#include "hpl.h"\fR
 
\fB\&void\fR
\fB\&HPL_dlaswp03N(\fR
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&M\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&N\fR,
\fB\&double *\fR
\fI\&U\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&LDU\fR,
\fB\&const double *\fR
\fI\&W0\fR,
\fB\&const double *\fR
\fI\&W\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&LDW\fR
\fB\&);\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fB\&HPL_dlaswp03N\fR
copies columns of  W  into  rows  of an  array  U.  The
destination in U of these columns contained in W is stored within W0.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP 8
M       (local input)           const int
On entry, M  specifies  the  number  of columns of  W  stored
contiguously that should be copied into U. M must be at least
zero.
.TP 8
N       (local input)           const int
On entry,  N  specifies  the  length of columns of  W  stored
contiguously that should be copied into U. N must be at least
zero.
.TP 8
U       (local input/output)    double *
On entry, U points to an array of dimension (LDU,N).  Columns
of W are copied as rows within this array U at  the positions
specified in W0.
.TP 8
LDU     (local input)           const int
On entry, LDU specifies the leading dimension of the array U.
LDU must be at least MAX(1,M).
.TP 8
W0      (local input)           const double *
On entry,  W0  is an array of size (M-1)*LDW+1, that contains
the destination offset  in U where the columns of W should be
copied.
.TP 8
W       (local input)           const double *
On entry, W  is an array of size (LDW,M),  that contains data
to be copied into U. For i in [0..M),  entries W(:,i)  should
be copied into the row or column W0(i*LDW) of U.
.TP 8
LDW     (local input)           const int
On entry, LDW specifies the leading dimension of the array W.
LDW must be at least MAX(1,N+1).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR HPL_dlaswp00N \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp10N \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp01N \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp01T \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp02N \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp03N \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp03T \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp04N \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp04T \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp05N \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp05T \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp06N \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp06T \ (3).
