.TH HPL_dgemm 3 "January 20, 2004" "HPL 1.0a" "HPL Library Functions"
.SH NAME
HPL_dgemm \- C := alpha * op(A) * op(B) + beta * C.
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fB\&#include "hpl.h"\fR
 
\fB\&void\fR
\fB\&HPL_dgemm(\fR
\fB\&const enum HPL_ORDER\fR
\fI\&ORDER\fR,
\fB\&const enum HPL_TRANS\fR
\fI\&TRANSA\fR,
\fB\&const enum HPL_TRANS\fR
\fI\&TRANSB\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&M\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&N\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&K\fR,
\fB\&const double\fR
\fI\&ALPHA\fR,
\fB\&const double *\fR
\fI\&A\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&LDA\fR,
\fB\&const double *\fR
\fI\&B\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&LDB\fR,
\fB\&const double\fR
\fI\&BETA\fR,
\fB\&double *\fR
\fI\&C\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&LDC\fR
\fB\&);\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fB\&HPL_dgemm\fR
performs one of the matrix-matrix operations
 
    C := alpha * op( A ) * op( B ) + beta * C
 
 where op( X ) is one of
 
    op( X ) = X   or   op( X ) = X^T.
 
Alpha and beta are scalars,  and A,  B and C are matrices, with op(A)
an m by k matrix, op(B) a k by n matrix and  C an m by n matrix.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP 8
ORDER   (local input)           const enum HPL_ORDER
On entry, ORDER  specifies the storage format of the operands
as follows:                                                  
   ORDER = HplRowMajor,                                      
   ORDER = HplColumnMajor.                                   
.TP 8
TRANSA  (local input)           const enum HPL_TRANS
On entry, TRANSA  specifies the form of  op(A)  to be used in
the matrix-matrix operation follows:                         
   TRANSA==HplNoTrans    : op( A ) = A,                     
   TRANSA==HplTrans      : op( A ) = A^T,                   
   TRANSA==HplConjTrans  : op( A ) = A^T.                   
.TP 8
TRANSB  (local input)           const enum HPL_TRANS
On entry, TRANSB  specifies the form of  op(B)  to be used in
the matrix-matrix operation follows:                         
   TRANSB==HplNoTrans    : op( B ) = B,                     
   TRANSB==HplTrans      : op( B ) = B^T,                   
   TRANSB==HplConjTrans  : op( B ) = B^T.                   
.TP 8
M       (local input)           const int
On entry,  M  specifies  the  number  of rows  of the  matrix
op(A)  and  of  the  matrix  C.  M  must  be  at least  zero.
.TP 8
N       (local input)           const int
On entry,  N  specifies  the number  of columns of the matrix
op(B)  and  the number of columns of the matrix  C. N must be
at least zero.
.TP 8
K       (local input)           const int
On entry,  K  specifies  the  number of columns of the matrix
op(A) and the number of rows of the matrix op(B).  K  must be
be at least  zero.
.TP 8
ALPHA   (local input)           const double
On entry, ALPHA specifies the scalar alpha.   When  ALPHA  is
supplied  as  zero  then the elements of the matrices A and B
need not be set on input.
.TP 8
A       (local input)           const double *
On entry,  A  is an array of dimension (LDA,ka),  where ka is
k  when   TRANSA==HplNoTrans,  and  is  m  otherwise.  Before
entry  with  TRANSA==HplNoTrans, the  leading  m by k part of
the array  A must contain the matrix A, otherwise the leading
k  by  m  part of the array  A  must  contain the  matrix  A.
.TP 8
LDA     (local input)           const int
On entry, LDA  specifies the first dimension of A as declared
in the  calling (sub) program. When  TRANSA==HplNoTrans  then
LDA must be at least max(1,m), otherwise LDA must be at least
max(1,k).
.TP 8
B       (local input)           const double *
On entry, B is an array of dimension (LDB,kb),  where  kb  is
n   when  TRANSB==HplNoTrans, and  is  k  otherwise.   Before
entry with TRANSB==HplNoTrans,  the  leading  k by n  part of
the array  B must contain the matrix B, otherwise the leading
n  by  k  part of the array  B  must  contain  the matrix  B.
.TP 8
LDB     (local input)           const int
On entry, LDB  specifies the first dimension of B as declared
in the  calling (sub) program. When  TRANSB==HplNoTrans  then
LDB must be at least max(1,k), otherwise LDB must be at least
max(1,n).
.TP 8
BETA    (local input)           const double
On entry,  BETA  specifies the scalar  beta.   When  BETA  is
supplied  as  zero  then  the  elements of the matrix C  need
not be set on input.
.TP 8
C       (local input/output)    double *
On entry,  C  is an array of dimension (LDC,n). Before entry,
the  leading m by n part  of  the  array  C  must contain the
matrix C,  except when beta is zero, in which case C need not
be set on entry. On exit, the array  C  is overwritten by the
m by n  matrix ( alpha*op( A )*op( B ) + beta*C ).
.TP 8
LDC     (local input)           const int
On entry, LDC  specifies the first dimension of C as declared
in  the   calling  (sub)  program.   LDC  must  be  at  least
max(1,m).
.SH EXAMPLE
\fI\&#include "hpl.h"\fR
 
int main(int argc, char *argv[])
.br
{
.br
   double a[2*2], b[2*2], c[2*2];
.br
   a[0] = 1.0; a[1] = 2.0; a[2] = 3.0; a[3] = 3.0;
.br
   b[0] = 2.0; b[1] = 1.0; b[2] = 1.0; b[3] = 2.0;
.br
   c[0] = 4.0; c[1] = 3.0; c[2] = 2.0; c[3] = 1.0;
.br
   HPL_dgemm( HplColumnMajor, HplNoTrans, HplNoTrans,
.br
              2, 2, 2, 2.0, a, 2, b, 2, -1.0, c, 2 );
.br
   printf("  [%f,%f]\en", c[0], c[2]);
.br
   printf("c=[%f,%f]\en", c[1], c[3]);
.br
   exit(0); return(0);
.br
}
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR HPL_dtrsm \ (3).
