.TH HPL_plindx10 3 "January 20, 2004" "HPL 1.0a" "HPL Library Functions"
.SH NAME
HPL_plindx10 \- Compute the logarithmic maps for the spreading.
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fB\&#include "hpl.h"\fR
 
\fB\&void\fR
\fB\&HPL_plindx10(\fR
\fB\&HPL_T_panel *\fR
\fI\&PANEL\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&K\fR,
\fB\&const int *\fR
\fI\&IPID\fR,
\fB\&int *\fR
\fI\&IPLEN\fR,
\fB\&int *\fR
\fI\&IPMAP\fR,
\fB\&int *\fR
\fI\&IPMAPM1\fR
\fB\&);\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fB\&HPL_plindx10\fR
computes  three arrays  IPLEN,  IPMAP  and  IPMAPM1  that
contain the logarithmic mapping information for the spreading phase.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP 8
PANEL   (local input/output)    HPL_T_panel *
On entry,  PANEL  points to the data structure containing the
panel information.
.TP 8
K       (global input)          const int
On entry, K specifies the number of entries in IPID.  K is at
least 2*N, and at most 4*N.
.TP 8
IPID    (global input)          const int *
On entry,  IPID  is an array of length K. The first K entries
of that array contain the src and final destination resulting
from the application of the interchanges.
.TP 8
IPLEN   (global output)         int *
On entry, IPLEN  is an array of dimension NPROW + 1. On exit,
this array is such that  IPLEN[i]  is the number of rows of A
in the processes  before process IMAP[i] after the sort, with
the convention that IPLEN[nprow] is the total number of rows.
In other words,  IPLEN[i+1] - IPLEN[i] is the local number of
rows of  A  that should be moved for each process.  IPLEN  is
such that the number of rows of the source process row can be
computed as IPLEN[1] - IPLEN[0], and the remaining entries of
this  array are sorted  so  that  the quantities IPLEN[i+1] -
IPLEN[i] are logarithmically sorted.
.TP 8
IPMAP   (global output)         int *
On entry, IPMAP is an array of dimension NPROW. On exit, this
array contains  the logarithmic mapping of the processes.  In
other words, IPMAP[myrow] is the corresponding sorted process
coordinate.
.TP 8
IPMAPM1 (global output)         int *
On entry, IPMAPM1  is an array of dimension NPROW.  On  exit,
this  array  contains  the inverse of the logarithmic mapping
contained  in  IPMAP:  IPMAPM1[ IPMAP[i] ] = i,  for all i in
[0.. NPROW)
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR HPL_pdlaswp00N \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdlaswp00T \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdlaswp01N \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdlaswp01T \ (3).
