.TH HPL_xjumpm 3 "January 20, 2004" "HPL 1.0a" "HPL Library Functions"
.SH NAME
HPL_xjumpm \- Compute constants to jump in the random sequence.
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fB\&#include "hpl.h"\fR
 
\fB\&void\fR
\fB\&HPL_xjumpm(\fR
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&JUMPM\fR,
\fB\&int *\fR
\fI\&MULT\fR,
\fB\&int *\fR
\fI\&IADD\fR,
\fB\&int *\fR
\fI\&IRANN\fR,
\fB\&int *\fR
\fI\&IRANM\fR,
\fB\&int *\fR
\fI\&IAM\fR,
\fB\&int *\fR
\fI\&ICM\fR
\fB\&);\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fB\&HPL_xjumpm\fR
computes  the constants  A and C  to jump JUMPM numbers in
the random sequence: X(n+JUMPM) = A*X(n)+C.  The constants encoded in
MULT and IADD  specify  how to jump from one entry in the sequence to
the next.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP 8
JUMPM   (local input)           const int
On entry,  JUMPM  specifies  the  number  of entries  in  the
sequence to jump over. When JUMPM is less or equal than zero,
A and C are not computed, IRANM is set to IRANN corresponding
to a jump of size zero.
.TP 8
MULT    (local input)           int *
On entry, MULT is an array of dimension 2,  that contains the
16-lower  and 15-higher bits of the constant  a  to jump from
X(n) to X(n+1) = a*X(n) + c in the random sequence.
.TP 8
IADD    (local input)           int *
On entry, IADD is an array of dimension 2,  that contains the
16-lower  and 15-higher bits of the constant  c  to jump from
X(n) to X(n+1) = a*X(n) + c in the random sequence.
.TP 8
IRANN   (local input)           int *
On entry, IRANN is an array of dimension 2. that contains the
16-lower and 15-higher bits of the encoding of X(n).
.TP 8
IRANM   (local output)          int *
On entry,  IRANM  is an array of dimension 2.   On exit, this
array  contains respectively  the 16-lower and 15-higher bits
of the encoding of X(n+JUMPM).
.TP 8
IAM     (local output)          int *
On entry, IAM is an array of dimension 2. On exit, when JUMPM
is  greater  than  zero,  this  array  contains  the  encoded
constant  A  to jump from  X(n) to  X(n+JUMPM)  in the random
sequence. IAM(0:1)  contains  respectively  the  16-lower and
15-higher  bits  of this constant  A. When  JUMPM  is less or
equal than zero, this array is not referenced.
.TP 8
ICM     (local output)          int *
On entry, ICM is an array of dimension 2. On exit, when JUMPM
is  greater  than  zero,  this  array  contains  the  encoded
constant  C  to jump from  X(n)  to  X(n+JUMPM) in the random
sequence. ICM(0:1)  contains  respectively  the  16-lower and
15-higher  bits  of this constant  C. When  JUMPM  is less or
equal than zero, this array is not referenced.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR HPL_ladd \ (3),
.BR HPL_lmul \ (3),
.BR HPL_setran \ (3),
.BR HPL_jumpit \ (3),
.BR HPL_rand \ (3).
