.TH HPL_dlaprnt 3 "January 20, 2004" "HPL 1.0a" "HPL Library Functions"
.SH NAME
HPL_dlaprnt \- Print the matrix A.
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fB\&#include "hpl.h"\fR
 
\fB\&void\fR
\fB\&HPL_dlaprnt(\fR
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&M\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&N\fR,
\fB\&double *\fR
\fI\&A\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&IA\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&JA\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&LDA\fR,
\fB\&const char *\fR
\fI\&CMATNM\fR
\fB\&);\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fB\&HPL_dlaprnt\fR
prints to standard error an M-by-N matrix A.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP 8
M       (local input)           const int
On entry,  M  specifies the number of rows of A. M must be at
least zero.
.TP 8
N       (local input)           const int
On entry,  N  specifies the number of columns of A. N must be
at least zero.
.TP 8
A       (local input)           double *
On entry, A  points to an array of dimension (LDA,N).
.TP 8
IA      (local input)           const int
On entry, IA specifies the starting row index to be printed.
.TP 8
JA      (local input)           const int
On entry,  JA  specifies  the  starting  column index  to be
printed.
.TP 8
LDA     (local input)           const int
On entry, LDA specifies the leading dimension of the array A.
LDA must be at least max(1,M).
.TP 8
CMATNM  (local input)           const char *
On entry, CMATNM is the name of the matrix to be printed.
.SH EXAMPLE
\fI\&#include "hpl.h"\fR
 
int main(int argc, char *argv[])
.br
{
.br
   double a[2*2];
.br
   a[0] = 1.0; a[1] = 3.0; a[2] = 2.0; a[3] = 4.0;
.br
   HPL_dlaprnt( 2, 2, a, 0, 0, 2, "A" );
.br
   exit(0); return(0);
.br
}
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR HPL_fprintf \ (3).
