.TH HPL_logsort 3 "January 20, 2004" "HPL 1.0a" "HPL Library Functions"
.SH NAME
HPL_logsort \- Sort the processes in logarithmic order.
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fB\&#include "hpl.h"\fR
 
\fB\&void\fR
\fB\&HPL_logsort(\fR
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&NPROCS\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&ICURROC\fR,
\fB\&int *\fR
\fI\&IPLEN\fR,
\fB\&int *\fR
\fI\&IPMAP\fR,
\fB\&int *\fR
\fI\&IPMAPM1\fR
\fB\&);\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fB\&HPL_logsort\fR
computes an array  IPMAP  and  its inverse  IPMAPM1  that
contain  the logarithmic sorted processes id with repect to the local
number of rows of  U  that they own. This is necessary to ensure that
the logarithmic spreading of U is optimal in terms of number of steps
and communication volume as well.  In other words,  the larget pieces
of U will be sent a minimal number of times.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP 8
NPROCS  (global input)          const int
On entry, NPROCS  specifies the number of process rows in the
process grid. NPROCS is at least one.
.TP 8
ICURROC (global input)          const int
On entry, ICURROC is the source process row.
.TP 8
IPLEN   (global input/output)   int *
On entry, IPLEN is an array of dimension NPROCS+1,  such that
IPLEN[0] is 0, and IPLEN[i] contains the number of rows of U,
that process i-1 has.  On exit,  IPLEN[i]  is  the number  of
rows of U  in the processes before process IPMAP[i] after the
sort,  with  the convention that  IPLEN[NPROCS] is  the total
number  of rows  of the panel.  In other words,  IPLEN[i+1] -
IPLEN[i] is  the  number of rows of A that should be moved to
the process IPMAP[i].  IPLEN  is such that the number of rows
of  the  source process  row is IPLEN[1] - IPLEN[0],  and the
remaining  entries  of  this  array  are  sorted  so that the
quantities IPLEN[i+1]-IPLEN[i] are logarithmically sorted.
.TP 8
IPMAP   (global output)         int *
On entry,  IPMAP  is an array of dimension  NPROCS.  On exit,
array contains  the logarithmic mapping of the processes.  In
other words, IPMAP[myroc] is the corresponding sorted process
coordinate.
.TP 8
IPMAPM1 (global output)         int *
On entry, IPMAPM1  is an array of dimension NPROCS.  On exit,
this  array  contains  the inverse of the logarithmic mapping
contained  in  IPMAP:  IPMAPM1[ IPMAP[i] ] = i,  for all i in
[0.. NPROCS)
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR HPL_plindx1 \ (3),
.BR HPL_plindx10 \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdlaswp01N \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdlaswp01T \ (3).
