.TH HPL_pdinfo 3 "January 20, 2004" "HPL 1.0a" "HPL Library Functions"
.SH NAME
HPL_pdinfo \- Read input parameter file.
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fB\&#include "hpl.h"\fR
 
\fB\&void\fR
\fB\&HPL_pdinfo(\fR
\fB\&HPL_T_test *\fR
\fI\&TEST\fR,
\fB\&int *\fR
\fI\&NS\fR,
\fB\&int *\fR
\fI\&N\fR,
\fB\&int *\fR
\fI\&NBS\fR,
\fB\&int *\fR
\fI\&NB\fR,
\fB\&HPL_T_ORDER *\fR
\fI\&PMAPPIN\fR,
\fB\&int *\fR
\fI\&NPQS\fR,
\fB\&int *\fR
\fI\&P\fR,
\fB\&int *\fR
\fI\&Q\fR,
\fB\&int *\fR
\fI\&NPFS\fR,
\fB\&HPL_T_FACT *\fR
\fI\&PF\fR,
\fB\&int *\fR
\fI\&NBMS\fR,
\fB\&int *\fR
\fI\&NBM\fR,
\fB\&int *\fR
\fI\&NDVS\fR,
\fB\&int *\fR
\fI\&NDV\fR,
\fB\&int *\fR
\fI\&NRFS\fR,
\fB\&HPL_T_FACT *\fR
\fI\&RF\fR,
\fB\&int *\fR
\fI\&NTPS\fR,
\fB\&HPL_T_TOP *\fR
\fI\&TP\fR,
\fB\&int *\fR
\fI\&NDHS\fR,
\fB\&int *\fR
\fI\&DH\fR,
\fB\&HPL_T_SWAP *\fR
\fI\&FSWAP\fR,
\fB\&int *\fR
\fI\&TSWAP\fR,
\fB\&int *\fR
\fI\&L1NOTRAN\fR,
\fB\&int *\fR
\fI\&UNOTRAN\fR,
\fB\&int *\fR
\fI\&EQUIL\fR,
\fB\&int *\fR
\fI\&ALIGN\fR
\fB\&);\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fB\&HPL_pdinfo\fR
reads  the  startup  information for the various tests and
transmits it to all processes.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP 8
TEST    (global output)         HPL_T_test *
On entry, TEST  points to a testing data structure.  On exit,
the fields of this data structure are initialized as follows:
TEST->outfp  specifies the output file where the results will
be printed.  It is only defined and used by  the process 0 of
the grid.  TEST->thrsh specifies the threshhold value for the
test ratio.  TEST->epsil is the relative machine precision of
the distributed computer.  Finally  the test counters, kfail,
kpass, kskip, ktest are initialized to zero.
.TP 8
NS      (global output)         int *
On exit,  NS  specifies the number of different problem sizes
to be tested. NS is less than or equal to HPL_MAX_PARAM.
.TP 8
N       (global output)         int *
On entry, N is an array of dimension HPL_MAX_PARAM.  On exit,
the first NS entries of this array contain the  problem sizes
to run the code with.
.TP 8
NBS     (global output)         int *
On exit,  NBS  specifies the number of different distribution
blocking factors to be tested. NBS must be less than or equal
to HPL_MAX_PARAM.
.TP 8
NB      (global output)         int *
On exit,  PMAPPIN  specifies the process mapping onto the no-
des of the  MPI machine configuration.  PMAPPIN  defaults  to
row-major ordering.
.TP 8
PMAPPIN (global output)         HPL_T_ORDER *
On entry, NB is an array of dimension HPL_MAX_PARAM. On exit,
the first NBS entries of this array contain the values of the
various distribution blocking factors, to run the code with.
.TP 8
NPQS    (global output)         int *
On exit, NPQS  specifies the  number of different values that
can be used for P and Q, i.e., the number of process grids to
run  the  code with.  NPQS must be  less  than  or  equal  to
HPL_MAX_PARAM.
.TP 8
P       (global output)         int *
On entry, P  is an array of dimension HPL_MAX_PARAM. On exit,
the first NPQS entries of this array contain the values of P,
the number of process rows of the  NPQS grids to run the code
with.
.TP 8
Q       (global output)         int *
On entry, Q  is an array of dimension HPL_MAX_PARAM. On exit,
the first NPQS entries of this array contain the values of Q,
the number of process columns of the  NPQS  grids to  run the
code with.
.TP 8
NPFS    (global output)         int *
On exit, NPFS  specifies the  number of different values that
can be used for PF : the panel factorization algorithm to run
the code with. NPFS is less than or equal to HPL_MAX_PARAM.
.TP 8
PF      (global output)         HPL_T_FACT *
On entry, PF is an array of dimension HPL_MAX_PARAM. On exit,
the first  NPFS  entries  of this array  contain  the various
panel factorization algorithms to run the code with.
.TP 8
NBMS    (global output)         int *
On exit,  NBMS  specifies  the  number  of  various recursive
stopping criteria  to be tested.  NBMS  must be  less than or
equal to HPL_MAX_PARAM.
.TP 8
NBM     (global output)         int *
On entry,  NBM  is an array of  dimension  HPL_MAX_PARAM.  On
exit, the first NBMS entries of this array contain the values
of the various recursive stopping criteria to be tested.
.TP 8
NDVS    (global output)         int *
On exit,  NDVS  specifies  the number  of various numbers  of
panels in recursion to be tested.  NDVS is less than or equal
to HPL_MAX_PARAM.
.TP 8
NDV     (global output)         int *
On entry,  NDV  is an array of  dimension  HPL_MAX_PARAM.  On
exit, the first NDVS entries of this array contain the values
of the various numbers of panels in recursion to be tested.
.TP 8
NRFS    (global output)         int *
On exit, NRFS  specifies the  number of different values that
can be used for RF : the recursive factorization algorithm to
be tested. NRFS is less than or equal to HPL_MAX_PARAM.
.TP 8
RF      (global output)         HPL_T_FACT *
On entry, RF is an array of dimension HPL_MAX_PARAM. On exit,
the first  NRFS  entries  of  this array contain  the various
recursive factorization algorithms to run the code with.
.TP 8
NTPS    (global output)         int *
On exit, NTPS  specifies the  number of different values that
can be used for the  broadcast topologies  to be tested. NTPS
is less than or equal to HPL_MAX_PARAM.
.TP 8
TP      (global output)         HPL_T_TOP *
On entry, TP is an array of dimension HPL_MAX_PARAM. On exit,
the  first NTPS  entries of this  array  contain  the various
broadcast (along rows) topologies to run the code with.
.TP 8
NDHS    (global output)         int *
On exit, NDHS  specifies the  number of different values that
can be used for the  lookahead depths to be  tested.  NDHS is
less than or equal to HPL_MAX_PARAM.
.TP 8
DH      (global output)         int *
On entry,  DH  is  an array of  dimension  HPL_MAX_PARAM.  On
exit, the first NDHS entries of this array contain the values
of lookahead depths to run the code with.  Such a value is at
least 0 (no-lookahead) or greater than zero.
.TP 8
FSWAP   (global output)         HPL_T_SWAP *
On exit, FSWAP specifies the swapping algorithm to be used in
all tests.
.TP 8
TSWAP   (global output)         int *
On exit,  TSWAP  specifies the swapping threshold as a number
of columns when the mixed swapping algorithm was chosen.
.TP 8
L1NOTRA (global output)         int *
On exit, L1NOTRAN specifies whether the upper triangle of the
panels of columns  should  be stored  in  no-transposed  form
(L1NOTRAN=1) or in transposed form (L1NOTRAN=0).
.TP 8
UNOTRAN (global output)         int *
On exit, UNOTRAN  specifies whether the panels of rows should
be stored in  no-transposed form  (UNOTRAN=1)  or  transposed
form (UNOTRAN=0) during their broadcast.
.TP 8
EQUIL   (global output)         int *
On exit,  EQUIL  specifies  whether  equilibration during the
swap-broadcast  of  the  panel of rows  should  be  performed
(EQUIL=1) or not (EQUIL=0).
.TP 8
ALIGN   (global output)         int *
On exit,  ALIGN  specifies the alignment  of  the dynamically
allocated buffers in double precision words. ALIGN is greater
than zero.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR HPL_pddriver \ (3),
.BR HPL_pdtest \ (3).
