.TH HPL_numrocI 3 "January 20, 2004" "HPL 1.0a" "HPL Library Functions"
.SH NAME
HPL_numrocI \- Compute the local number of row/columns.
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fB\&#include "hpl.h"\fR
 
\fB\&int\fR
\fB\&HPL_numrocI(\fR
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&N\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&I\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&INB\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&NB\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&PROC\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&SRCPROC\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&NPROCS\fR
\fB\&);\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fB\&HPL_numrocI\fR
returns  the  local number of matrix rows/columns process
PROC  will  get  if  we give out  N rows/columns starting from global
index I.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP 8
N       (input)                 const int
On entry, N  specifies the number of rows/columns being dealt
out. N must be at least zero.
.TP 8
I       (input)                 const int
On entry, I  specifies the global index of the matrix  entry
I must be at least zero.
.TP 8
INB     (input)                 const int
On entry,  INB  specifies  the size of the first block of th
global matrix. INB must be at least one.
.TP 8
NB      (input)                 const int
On entry,  NB specifies the blocking factor used to partition
and distribute the matrix A. NB must be larger than one.
.TP 8
PROC    (input)                 const int
On entry, PROC specifies  the coordinate of the process whos
local portion is determined.  PROC must be at least zero  an
strictly less than NPROCS.
.TP 8
SRCPROC (input)                 const int
On entry,  SRCPROC  specifies  the coordinate of the  proces
that possesses the first row or column of the matrix. SRCPRO
must be at least zero and strictly less than NPROCS.
.TP 8
NPROCS  (input)                 const int
On entry,  NPROCS  specifies the total number of process row
or columns over which the matrix is distributed.  NPROCS mus
be at least one.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR HPL_indxg2l \ (3),
.BR HPL_indxg2lp \ (3),
.BR HPL_indxg2p \ (3),
.BR HPL_indxl2g \ (3),
.BR HPL_numroc \ (3).
