.TH HPL_indxl2g 3 "January 20, 2004" "HPL 1.0a" "HPL Library Functions"
.SH NAME
HPL_indxl2g \- Map a index-process pair into a global index.
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fB\&#include "hpl.h"\fR
 
\fB\&int\fR
\fB\&HPL_indxl2g(\fR
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&IL\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&INB\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&NB\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&PROC\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&SRCPROC\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&NPROCS\fR
\fB\&);\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fB\&HPL_indxl2g\fR
computes the global index of a matrix  entry  pointed to
by the local index IL of the process indicated by PROC.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP 8
IL      (input)                 const int
On entry, IL specifies the local  index of the matrix  entry.
IL must be at least zero.
.TP 8
INB     (input)                 const int
On entry,  INB  specifies  the size of the first block of the
global matrix. INB must be at least one.
.TP 8
NB      (input)                 const int
On entry,  NB specifies the blocking factor used to partition
and distribute the matrix A. NB must be larger than one.
.TP 8
PROC    (input)                 const int
On entry, PROC  specifies the coordinate of the process whose
local array row or column is to be determined. PROC  must  be
at least zero and strictly less than NPROCS.
.TP 8
SRCPROC (input)                 const int
On entry,  SRCPROC  specifies  the coordinate of the  process
that possesses the first row or column of the matrix. SRCPROC
must be at least zero and strictly less than NPROCS.
.TP 8
NPROCS  (input)                 const int
On entry,  NPROCS  specifies the total number of process rows
or columns over which the matrix is distributed.  NPROCS must
be at least one.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR HPL_indxg2l \ (3),
.BR HPL_indxg2lp \ (3),
.BR HPL_indxg2p \ (3),
.BR HPL_numroc \ (3),
.BR HPL_numrocI \ (3).
