.TH HPL_indxg2lp 3 "January 20, 2004" "HPL 1.0a" "HPL Library Functions"
.SH NAME
HPL_indxg2lp \- Map a local index into a global one.
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fB\&#include "hpl.h"\fR
 
\fB\&void\fR
\fB\&HPL_indxg2lp(\fR
\fB\&int *\fR
\fI\&IL\fR,
\fB\&int *\fR
\fI\&PROC\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&IG\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&INB\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&NB\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&SRCPROC\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&NPROCS\fR
\fB\&);\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fB\&HPL_indxg2lp\fR
computes the local index of a matrix entry pointed to by
the global  index IG as well as the process coordinate which posseses
this entry. The local returned index is the same in all processes.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP 8
IL      (output)                int *
On exit, IL specifies the local index corresponding to IG. IL
is at least zero.
.TP 8
PROC    (output)                int *
On exit,  PROC  is the  coordinate of the process  owning the
entry specified by the global index IG. PROC is at least zero
and less than NPROCS.
.TP 8
IG      (input)                 const int
On entry, IG specifies the global index of the matrix  entry.
IG must be at least zero.
.TP 8
INB     (input)                 const int
On entry,  INB  specifies  the size of the first block of the
global matrix. INB must be at least one.
.TP 8
NB      (input)                 const int
On entry,  NB specifies the blocking factor used to partition
and distribute the matrix A. NB must be larger than one.
.TP 8
SRCPROC (input)                 const int
On entry, if SRCPROC = -1, the data  is not  distributed  but
replicated,  in  which  case  this  routine returns IG in all
processes. Otherwise, the value of SRCPROC is ignored.
.TP 8
NPROCS  (input)                 const int
On entry,  NPROCS  specifies the total number of process rows
or columns over which the matrix is distributed.  NPROCS must
be at least one.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR HPL_indxg2l \ (3),
.BR HPL_indxg2p \ (3),
.BR HPL_indxl2g \ (3),
.BR HPL_numroc \ (3),
.BR HPL_numrocI \ (3).
