.TH HPL_dtrsv 3 "January 20, 2004" "HPL 1.0a" "HPL Library Functions"
.SH NAME
HPL_dtrsv \- x := A^{-1} x.
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fB\&#include "hpl.h"\fR
 
\fB\&void\fR
\fB\&HPL_dtrsv(\fR
\fB\&const enum HPL_ORDER\fR
\fI\&ORDER\fR,
\fB\&const enum HPL_UPLO\fR
\fI\&UPLO\fR,
\fB\&const enum HPL_TRANS\fR
\fI\&TRANS\fR,
\fB\&const enum HPL_DIAG\fR
\fI\&DIAG\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&N\fR,
\fB\&const double *\fR
\fI\&A\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&LDA\fR,
\fB\&double *\fR
\fI\&X\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&INCX\fR
\fB\&);\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fB\&HPL_dtrsv\fR
solves one of the systems of equations
 
    A * x = b,   or   A^T * x = b,
 
where b and x are n-element vectors and  A  is an n by n non-unit, or
unit, upper or lower triangular matrix.
 
No test for  singularity  or  near-singularity  is included  in  this
routine. Such tests must be performed before calling this routine.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP 8
ORDER   (local input)           const enum HPL_ORDER
On entry, ORDER  specifies the storage format of the operands
as follows:                                                  
   ORDER = HplRowMajor,                                      
   ORDER = HplColumnMajor.                                   
.TP 8
UPLO    (local input)           const enum HPL_UPLO
On  entry,   UPLO   specifies  whether  the  upper  or  lower
triangular  part  of the array  A  is to be referenced.  When
UPLO==HplUpper, only  the upper triangular part of A is to be
referenced, otherwise only the lower triangular part of A is 
to be referenced. 
.TP 8
TRANS   (local input)           const enum HPL_TRANS
On entry,  TRANS  specifies  the equations  to  be  solved as
follows:
   TRANS==HplNoTrans     A   * x = b,
   TRANS==HplTrans       A^T * x = b.
.TP 8
DIAG    (local input)           const enum HPL_DIAG
On entry,  DIAG  specifies  whether  A  is unit triangular or
not. When DIAG==HplUnit,  A is assumed to be unit triangular,
and otherwise, A is not assumed to be unit triangular.
.TP 8
N       (local input)           const int
On entry, N specifies the order of the matrix A. N must be at
least zero.
.TP 8
A       (local input)           const double *
On entry,  A  points  to an array of size equal to or greater
than LDA * n. Before entry with  UPLO==HplUpper,  the leading
n by n upper triangular  part of the array A must contain the
upper triangular  matrix and the  strictly  lower  triangular
part of A is not referenced.  When  UPLO==HplLower  on entry,
the  leading n by n lower triangular part of the array A must
contain the lower triangular matrix  and  the  strictly upper
triangular part of A is not referenced.
 
Note  that  when  DIAG==HplUnit,  the diagonal elements of  A
not referenced  either,  but are assumed to be unity.
.TP 8
LDA     (local input)           const int
On entry,  LDA  specifies  the  leading  dimension  of  A  as
declared  in  the  calling  (sub) program.  LDA  must  be  at
least MAX(1,n).
.TP 8
X       (local input/output)    double *
On entry,  X  is an incremented array of dimension  at  least
( 1 + ( n - 1 ) * abs( INCX ) )  that  contains the vector x.
Before entry,  the  incremented array  X  must contain  the n
element right-hand side vector b. On exit,  X  is overwritten
with the solution vector x.
.TP 8
INCX    (local input)           const int
On entry, INCX specifies the increment for the elements of X.
INCX must not be zero.
.SH EXAMPLE
\fI\&#include "hpl.h"\fR
 
int main(int argc, char *argv[])
.br
{
.br
   double a[2*2], x[2];
.br
   a[0] = 4.0; a[1] = 1.0; a[2] = 2.0; a[3] = 5.0;
.br
   x[0] = 2.0; x[1] = 1.0;
.br
   HPL_dtrsv( HplColumnMajor, HplLower, HplNoTrans,
.br
              HplNoUnit, a, 2, x, 1 );
.br
   printf("x=[%f,%f]\en", x[0], x[1]);
.br
   exit(0); return(0);
.br
}
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR HPL_dger \ (3),
.BR HPL_dgemv \ (3).
