.TH HPL_dlaswp01N 3 "January 20, 2004" "HPL 1.0a" "HPL Library Functions"
.SH NAME
HPL_dlaswp01N \- copies rows of A into itself and into U.
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fB\&#include "hpl.h"\fR
 
\fB\&void\fR
\fB\&HPL_dlaswp01N(\fR
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&M\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&N\fR,
\fB\&double *\fR
\fI\&A\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&LDA\fR,
\fB\&double *\fR
\fI\&U\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&LDU\fR,
\fB\&const int *\fR
\fI\&LINDXA\fR,
\fB\&const int *\fR
\fI\&LINDXAU\fR
\fB\&);\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fB\&HPL_dlaswp01N\fR
copies  scattered rows  of  A  into itself  and into an
array  U.  The row offsets in  A  of the source rows are specified by
LINDXA.  The  destination of those rows are specified by  LINDXAU.  A
positive value of  LINDXAU indicates that the array destination is U,
and A otherwise.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP 8
M       (local input)           const int
On entry, M  specifies the number of rows of A that should be
moved within A or copied into U. M must be at least zero.
.TP 8
N       (local input)           const int
On entry, N  specifies the length of rows of A that should be
moved within A or copied into U. N must be at least zero.
.TP 8
A       (local input/output)    double *
On entry, A points to an array of dimension (LDA,N). The rows
of this array specified by LINDXA should be moved within A or
copied into U.
.TP 8
LDA     (local input)           const int
On entry, LDA specifies the leading dimension of the array A.
LDA must be at least MAX(1,M).
.TP 8
U       (local input/output)    double *
On entry, U points to an array of dimension (LDU,N). The rows
of A specified by LINDXA are be copied within this array U at
the positions indicated by positive values of LINDXAU.
.TP 8
LDU     (local input)           const int
On entry, LDU specifies the leading dimension of the array U.
LDU must be at least MAX(1,M).
.TP 8
LINDXA  (local input)           const int *
On entry, LINDXA is an array of dimension M that contains the
local  row indexes  of  A  that should be moved within  A  or
or copied into U.
.TP 8
LINDXAU (local input)           const int *
On entry, LINDXAU  is an array of dimension  M that  contains
the local  row indexes of  U  where the rows of  A  should be
copied at. This array also contains the  local row offsets in
A where some of the rows of A should be moved to.  A positive
value of  LINDXAU[i]  indicates that the row  LINDXA[i]  of A
should be copied into U at the position LINDXAU[i]; otherwise
the row  LINDXA[i]  of  A  should be moved  at  the  position
-LINDXAU[i] within A.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR HPL_dlaswp00N \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp10N \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp01N \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp01T \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp02N \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp03N \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp03T \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp04N \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp04T \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp05N \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp05T \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp06N \ (3),
.BR HPL_dlaswp06T \ (3).
