.TH HPL_grid_init 3 "January 20, 2004" "HPL 1.0a" "HPL Library Functions"
.SH NAME
HPL_grid_init \- Create a process grid.
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fB\&#include "hpl.h"\fR
 
\fB\&int\fR
\fB\&HPL_grid_init(\fR
\fB\&MPI_Comm\fR
\fI\&COMM\fR,
\fB\&const HPL_T_ORDER\fR
\fI\&ORDER\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&NPROW\fR,
\fB\&const int\fR
\fI\&NPCOL\fR,
\fB\&HPL_T_grid *\fR
\fI\&GRID\fR
\fB\&);\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fB\&HPL_grid_init\fR
creates a NPROW x NPCOL  process  grid using column- or
row-major ordering from an initial collection of processes identified
by an  MPI  communicator.  Successful  completion is indicated by the
returned error code MPI_SUCCESS.  Other error codes depend on the MPI
implementation. The coordinates of processes that are not part of the
grid are set to values outside of [0..NPROW) x [0..NPCOL).
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP 8
COMM    (global/local input)    MPI_Comm
On entry,  COMM  is  the  MPI  communicator  identifying  the
initial  collection  of  processes out of which  the  grid is
formed.
.TP 8
ORDER   (global input)          const HPL_T_ORDER
On entry, ORDER specifies how the processes should be ordered
in the grid as follows:
   ORDER = HPL_ROW_MAJOR    row-major    ordering;
   ORDER = HPL_COLUMN_MAJOR column-major ordering;
.TP 8
NPROW   (global input)          const int
On entry,  NPROW  specifies the number of process rows in the
grid to be created. NPROW must be at least one.
.TP 8
NPCOL   (global input)          const int
On entry,  NPCOL  specifies  the number of process columns in
the grid to be created. NPCOL must be at least one.
.TP 8
GRID    (local input/output)    HPL_T_grid *
On entry,  GRID  points  to the data structure containing the
process grid information to be initialized.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR HPL_pnum \ (3),
.BR HPL_grid_info \ (3),
.BR HPL_grid_exit \ (3).
