:title: Users Guide: Configuration Declarations

.. _ug-configs:

**config** Declarations: command-line overrides
===============================================

The four main declaration keywords that have been introduced so far —
``var``, ``const``, ``param``, and ``type`` — support a mode in which
their initializing expressions in the source code can be overridden on
the command-line.  This is achieved by prefixing the declaration with
the keyword ``config``.  Chapel's ``config`` feature provides a simple
means of specifying and overriding default values.


``config var`` and ``config const``
-----------------------------------

*Configuration variables* are variables whose default values can be
overridden on the executable's command-line.  Here's a simple example:

.. literalinclude:: examples/users-guide/base/configs.chpl
  :caption:
  :language: chapel
  :lines: 1

Like a traditional ``var`` declaration, this creates a variable named
*n* of type ``int``, initialized to the value 10.  However, the
``config`` prefix causes the compiler to add a command-line flag to
the generated executable that supports overriding that default value.
For example, if we run the program as follows:

.. literalinclude:: examples/users-guide/base/configs.execopts
  :language: text
  :lines: 1

then *n* will be initialized to the value 1000 for that execution of
the program.  The arguments for these flags can also be specified
using ``=`` (with no spaces) as the separator between the argument
name and its value, as follows:

.. literalinclude:: examples/users-guide/base/configs.execopts
  :language: text
  :lines: 2

There is no difference between these two forms—it's simply a matter of
taste.

As with normal variables, a ``config var`` can be re-assigned
throughout its lifetime.  In contrast, ``config const`` declarations
cannot be changed once they are initialized, whether that initial
value comes from the source code or the command-line.  The following
statement declares a pair of configurable constants:

.. literalinclude:: examples/users-guide/base/configs.chpl
  :language: chapel
  :lines: 2-3

As with the previous case, we can override their default values on the
executable's command-line.  For instance the following switches to a
smaller value of *epsilon* and flips *debug* to ``true``:

.. literalinclude:: examples/users-guide/base/configs.execopts-fake
  :language: text
  :lines: 3

Boolean ``config`` declarations, like *debug* above, also support a
mode in which they can be set to ``true`` simply by using the flag
without a supporting value.  Thus, the previous command-line could
also have been written:

.. literalinclude:: examples/users-guide/base/configs.execopts-fake
  :language: text
  :lines: 4


``config param`` and ``config type``
------------------------------------

Chapel also supports configurable ``param`` and ``type`` declarations
via command-line flags.  However, since ``param`` values and types
must be known to the compiler, the default values are overridden using
flags on the compiler rather than the generated executable.

As an example, the following statements declare a series of
configurable ``param`` and ``type`` symbols:

.. literalinclude:: examples/users-guide/base/configs2.chpl
  :language: chapel
  :lines: 3-7

When overriding ``config`` declarations in the compiler the ``-s``
flag is used to set the new value.  As an example, to set **verbose**
to ``true``, we could compile as follows:

.. literalinclude:: examples/users-guide/base/configs2.compopts-fake
  :language: text
  :lines: 1

or:

.. literalinclude:: examples/users-guide/base/configs2.compopts-fake
  :language: text
  :lines: 9
          
As with the generated executable, boolean values can also be set on
the compiler's command line simply using the name of the flag.  Thus,
the following would be equivalent to the previous line:

.. literalinclude:: examples/users-guide/base/configs2.compopts-fake
  :language: text
  :lines: 2

As you'd expect, multiple ``config`` declarations can be overridden at
once.  For example, this command-line overrides the default
initializers for *bitMask*, *size*, and *age*:

.. literalinclude:: examples/users-guide/base/configs2.compopts-fake
  :language: text
  :lines: 3

One of the nice things about setting ``config`` declarations on the
compiler's command-line is that the specified value can be an
arbitrary Chapel expression, provided that the compiler can evaluate
it in place of the source-based initialization expression.  Thus, we
can use more interesting expressions when setting compile-time
``config`` values.  For example, the following compiler lines specify
*bitMask*, *size*, and *age* using expressions other than simple
literals and type names:

.. literalinclude:: examples/users-guide/base/configs2.compopts-fake
  :language: text
  :lines: 5-6

Note the use of quotes in some of the examples above.  These are not
required by Chapel itself, but are used to pass nontrivial expressions
through the command-line shell (e.g., **bash**) such that they reach
Chapel as a single uninterpreted argument.  For example, parenthesis
have special meaning for many command-shells, so the use of quotes
above tells the shell to ignore them.  Other cases use quotes to pass
expressions containing whitespace to the Chapel compiler as a single
argument.  Details about which characters have special meaning and how
they can be preserved depend on the specific shell being used and are
beyond the scope of this article.

Setting ``config`` defaults on the compiler's command-line also
supports more radical alterations to the code.  For example, we
could change *age* from an integral type to a floating point type:

.. literalinclude:: examples/users-guide/base/configs3.execopts-fake
  :language: text
  :lines: 4

Note that ``config`` declarations are processed in the order specified
by the source code and compiler, not the order that they occur on the
command-line.  Moreover, the initializing expressions must make sense
when considered in the source code context.  Thus, the command-line
override for a given ``config`` can refer to other declarations that
precede it in a given module.  For instance, we can set *age* in terms
of the ``config param`` *size* since it appeared earlier in the code:

.. literalinclude:: examples/users-guide/base/configs2.compopts-fake
  :language: text
  :lines: 7

However, the reverse would not be possible since *age* has not been
initialized when *size* is declared.

Similarly, subsequent declarations in the source code can themselves
be based on ``config`` declarations.  For instance, here are some
declarations that are based on the ``config param`` and ``config
type`` statements shown above and could follow them:

.. literalinclude:: examples/users-guide/base/configs2.chpl
  :language: chapel
  :lines: 9-11


Compile time overrides for ``config var`` and ``config const``
--------------------------------------------------------------

Users can also specify default expressions for ``config var`` and
``config const`` declarations on the compiler's command-line.  As with
other compile-time overrides, complex or symbolic expressions can be
used since the compiler is involved.  As an example, let's look at
a variation on one of our earlier declarations:

.. literalinclude:: examples/users-guide/base/configs3.chpl
  :language: chapel
  :lines: 1-2

The following compiler command can be used to override the source
code initializer for *epsilon* so that it will be a function of
*n* by default:

.. literalinclude:: examples/users-guide/base/configs3.compopts
  :language: text

Such an initializer could not be specified on the executable
command-line since the compiler is out of the picture by then.  At
that point, the values for a ``config var`` or ``config const`` are
restricted to the set of strings that can legally be cast to that
type.

Having compiled *epsilon* to be set in this way, if we specify
a value for *n* on the executable's command line:

.. literalinclude:: examples/users-guide/base/configs3.execopts-fake
  :language: text
  :lines: 2

then *epsilon* will be computed in terms of it, resulting in the value:

.. literalinclude:: examples/users-guide/base/configs3-n1000.good
  :language: text
  :lines: 2

Note that the compiler's command-line override can still be
re-overridden on the executable's command-line as usual:

.. literalinclude:: examples/users-guide/base/configs3.execopts-fake
  :language: text
  :lines: 4


Scope of ``config`` declarations
--------------------------------

Because all ``config`` declarations are processed at program startup
time, they must appear at *module scope*.  We haven't talked about
modules yet, so for now, think of them as needing to appear as
top-level statements in a file.

