=======================
Chapel Acknowledgements
=======================

This project is currently hosted by GitHub and we are grateful to them
for their ongoing support.  Its mailing lists are supported by
SourceForge, which also serves as an alternative download site, and we
appreciate their support for this and for years of source hosting
prior to our move to GitHub.

This material is based upon work that was supported by the Defense
Advanced Research Projects Agency under its Agreement
No. HR0011-07-9-0001 and its Contract No. NBCH3039003.  Any opinions,
findings and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of
the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency.

This work was also supported by the Center for Adaptive Supercomputing
Software for Multithreaded Architectures program (CASS-MT) at the
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, as well as the Laboratory for
Telecommunications Sciences at the University of Maryland.

This research has used resources of the National Center for
Computational Sciences at Oak Ridge National Laboratory, which is
supported by the Office of Science of the U.S. Department of Energy
under Contract No. DE-AC05-00OR22725.

Thanks very much to Argonne National Laboratory (www.anl.gov),
Barcelona Supercomputer Center (www.bsc.es), HPCx (www.hpcx.ac.uk),
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (www.lbl.gov), Lawrence
Livermore National Laboratory (www.llnl.gov), Pacific Northwest
National Laboratory (www.pnl.gov), SARA (www.sara.nl), and the
University of Vienna (www.univie.ac.at) for grants of machine time
used for testing the portability of our code over the course of the
project.

During its early years, this project was supported by a grant from
Washington Technology Center, and it was hosted for several years by
the University of Washington Computer Science and Engineering
Department -- thanks to both groups for their support.

Thanks very much to Intel for donating compiler licenses during the
initial years of the project for the purpose of portability testing.
