===================================================
Running Chapel Programs with GASNet on your Desktop
===================================================

This document give a few pointers on using Chapel with the GASNet
communication layer on your desktop.  For more general information
about using the GASNet communication layer, see multilocale.rst in
the release docs.


RUNNING
=======

Set GASNet environment variables for simulating multiple Chapel
locales on a single workstation as described in multilocale.rst.

GASNet may detect the existence of an Infiniband network even if one
does not exist (due to the inclusion of Infiniband in the Linux
kernel).  If you do not have an Infiniband NIC in your workstation (or
don't want to use it), set CHPL_GASNET_CFG_OPTIONS='--disable-ibv'
when you build the GASNet library for your Chapel installation.
Alternatively, you can set GASNET_QUIET=yes to avoid the GASNet
warning messages from GASNet regarding using the Infiniband conduit.

DEBUGGING
=========
See debugging.rst regarding debugging with CHPL_COMM_USE_GDB or
CHPL_COMM_USE_LLDB.

Sometimes GASNet issues are general multi-locale issues that can be
recreated by compiling the program with the --no-local flag and using
CHPL_COMM=none.  The --no-local flag assumes that all variables are
non-local, and thus the compiler inserts communication and
communication related calls into the code.  During program execution,
the runtime checks to see if the reference is remote (which it will
never will be), and if the generated code is correct, the program will
execute without issue.  If the program does not complete as expected,
you can use the --gdb flags to debug in gdb (see executing.rst).

DEBUGGING WITH VALGRIND
=======================

To debug using valgrind, use the following command

    % valgrind --trace-children=yes --suppressions=$CHPL_HOME/third-party/gasnet/gasnet-src/other/contrib/gasnet.supp

