Alternative Initializer Features
================================

Status:
  Inactive - Rejected

Authors:
  Kyle Brady, Lydia Duncan, Michael Ferguson, Mike Noakes, Vassily Litvinov

.. contents:: Outline
   :local:

Abstract
--------

This document contains some features we discussed as part of the
initializer story and chose not to incorporate.

Rationale
---------

During our development of the initializer story for Chapel
we considered a variety of features. Some of them were accepted
and some of them were rejected. This document records some of
the discussed-and-rejected features for posterity.

Features
--------

Alternative syntax for distinguishing Phase 1 and Phase 2 in an initializer
***************************************************************************

We considered providing dedicated syntax for distinguishing Phase 1
and Phase 2 in an initializer. This syntax, codenamed Syntax 2,
designates different block statements for Phase 1 and Phase 2,
separated by the proposed "finalize" keyword.

.. code-block:: chapel

   proc init() {
     ... Phase 1 code ...
     super.init(...);
   } finalize {
     ... Phase 2 code ...
   }

The super.init() call can be omitted if it passes no arguments.
The "finalize" keyword and the following block, if empty,
can also be omitted.

Syntax 2 has the advantage of visually-clear separation of the two
phases. We did not incorporate it because it did not allow sharing
variables or extending an if statement across the two phases.
Also, we would like Phase 2 to be the default, and it felt
unintuitive under Syntax 2.


Child's fields could depend on parent's fields
**********************************************

We considered allowing child's fields to be initialized based on
parent's fields. Below is one way to achieve this.

The child's initializer could control where, in its Phase 1, the
parent's Phase 1 is invoked. In other words, the parent's Phase 1
would not necessarily come at the end of the child initializer's Phase 1.
If the child needs to access its parent's fields, it can invoke
the parent's Phase 1 prior to such access.

Here is an example, which is based on Syntax 2.

.. code-block:: chapel

   class Parent {
     var D: domain(1);
     proc init(myRange) {
       D = {myRange};  // Phase 1
     } finalize {
       ... Phase 2 code ...
     }
   }

   class Child: Parent {
     var xD: domain(1);
     proc init(myRange, extra) {
       super.init(myRange);   // initializes Parent.D
       xD = D.expand(extra);  // initialize xD based on Parent.D
     } finalize {
       ... Phase 2 code ...
     }
   }

Analogously, we could allow the child initializer to control the point
during its Phase 2 when the parent initializer's Phase 2 is to be invoked.
For example:

.. code-block:: chapel

   class Child: Parent {
     proc init(...) {
       ... Phase 1 code ...
     } finalize {
       ... Phase 2 in Child ...
       super.finalize();      // executes Phase 2 in Parent
     }
   }

We did not incorporate this functionality because it adds complexity to
how initialization occurs.


Parent could have final control over the newly-created object
*************************************************************

We considered giving the parent class the ability to exercise final control
over the newly-created object via a "lastly" block.
An example where this is important
is if the new object must be be added to a shared list.
If the list is concurrently accessible, it is important for all other
invariants on the new object to have been established prior to such addition.
This includes any actions performed in child class initializer(s).
We did not incorporate the proposed feature because we preferred the user
to perform such "final" actions outside of the initializer or explicitly
in each child's initializer.

..
 One way to achieve this is by introducing the optional "lastly" phase.
 This phase in the parent initializer would be executed
 after all actions specified by child class(es) have completed.

..
 The following example relies on Syntax 2:

..
   class Parent {
     proc init(...) {
       ... Phase 1 in Parent ...
     } finalize {
       ... Phase 2 in Parent ...
     } lastly {
       AllObjects.add(this); // done after Parent's and Child's Phase 2
     }
   }
   class Child: Parent {
     proc init(...) finalize {
       ... Phase 2 in Child ...
     }
   }

..
 Another approach is to introduce "lastinit" methods.
 This approach was not brought up with the team.
 One "lastinit" method with 0 arguments could be optionally defined
 on each class.

..
 When defined, this method would be invoked on the newly-created object
 after all actions specified by its initializer(s) have completed.
 The "lastinit" method in the parent class would be invoked
 after all "lastinit" methods in the child class(es), if any,
 have completed. For example:

..
   class Parent {
     proc init(...) {
       ...
     }
     proc lastinit() {
       // this method executes after Parent's and Child's initializers
       AllObjects.add(this);
     }
   }
   class Child: Parent {
     proc init(...) {
       ...
     }
   }
