ZeroMQ Integration
==================

Status
  Inactive - Implemented

Author
  Michael Ferguson


Abstract
--------

Proposing the development of a Chapel language binding for ZeroMQ (see
http://zeromq.org/).

Rationale
---------

The data and task parallelism features of Chapel work well for building
tightly-coupled parallel programs, but some problems remain:

 * How can a Chapel program fit in to a distributed work-flow?
 * How can programs in other languages work with Chapel programs?
 * How can Chapel programs be used to write servers?
 * How can Chapel programs scale up and down depending on their input?

The answers to these questions are not clear. Naturally, each of these
questions could be addressed in many ways. The advantage of ZeroMQ integration
is that will provide one mechanism to enable all of these use cases.

Strategy
--------

ZeroMQ includes low-level C bindings, higher-level C bindings, as well
as language bindings for many other languages. The proposed strategy for
Chapel is to:

 1) Provide the low-level C bindings as a starting point
 2) Develop Chapel-specific ZeroMQ functionality that makes sense on top of the
    low-level C bindings
 3) Provide Chapel-specific message queue functionality that could be
    implemented with other messaging systems

Low-Level Bindings
------------------

Every function in the libzmq core library will be available with Chapel's C
compatibility layer. However, Chapel code will need to use C interoperability
features to call these functions.

I plan use the extern block syntax to populate Chapel programs with ZeroMQ
functions. If necessary, I plan to extend the extern block support to print
out the explicit Chapel function interfaces.

Chapel Bindings
---------------

Higher-level functionality will be available that integrates nicely with the
existing functionality for serializing Chapel variables. Chapel already
includes the idea of a channel which can read or write Chapel objects.

The basic operations in ZeroMQ are:

 * Creating a context. Some language bindings have an idea of a default context.
 * Creating, configuring, and connecting sockets
 * Moving data between sockets with send and recv calls.

Functions to work with the context and the sockets can be more or less the same
as those provided by the core library. The ZeroMQ guide recommends that
high-level APIs provide some specific features. See
http://zguide.zeromq.org/page:all#Features-of-a-Higher-Level-API . For Chapel,
I believe that means we need the following features:

 * Mechanisms closing sockets easier, possibly closing all sockets when closing
   a context, and possibly automatically handling the linger timeout
 * Integration with Chapel tasks. Ideally, the ZeroMQ functions should
   integrate with the Chapel tasking layer so that they can block a task (but
   not a thread). This has already been done for Python's ZeroMQ binding
   to support "green threads".
 * A "reactor" functionality that allows a user of the library to provide
   event handlers
 * Make sure that Ctrl-C works properly, since a ZeroMQ application is
   likely to be a server.

Send, Receive, Multipart Messages, and Message Boundaries
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

One initial integration idea for ZeroMQ is to make a Chapel channel that moves
data with ZeroMQ send and recv functions. However, doing so would not capture
one of the key ideas of ZeroMQ - it moves *messages* and not just a stream of
bytes. The channel interface is really for moving streams of bytes.

There are two approaches to address that mismatch:

 1) Enhance channels to be aware of message boundaries, or
 2) Provide send/recv as functions on ZeroMQ sockets that work
    analogously to write/read. In this case we would also want
    to provide a way to do a formatted send or receive (e.g. sendf might
    work with format strings as does writef).

    a) It would be pretty easy to make a multipart message interface
       where you'd open a multi-part message and each send/recv call would
       operate on one part. That would be like zmsg support in the CZMQ library
       (described here: http://api.zeromq.org/czmq3-0:zmsg ).

    b) If a Chapel programmer needs to use multiple calls to fill in
       a message but doesn't want a multi-part message, they would need to
       create a buffer, write to the buffer, and then send the buffer.

We believe that (2) is more intuitive and matches other ZeroMQ programming
examples. (2a) and (2b) could be left for future work in an initial
implementation.

Open Questions
--------------

* Should ZeroMQ be included as a built-in Chapel library? (like RE2 or GASNet)

* Can ZeroMQ integration require extern block support (Chapel built with LLVM)?

* Does Chapel need to support the serialization of circular data structures?
  (The serialization support provided by write/writef does not currently
  automatically handle such things, but neither does JSON).

* Can the generalized send/recv support assume IP functionality?

  * I think so; e.g. Infiniband provides IP over IB.

