Rules for inserting autoCopy
============================

Status
  Inactive - Superseded, see CHIP 13

Author
  Vassily Litvinov, Chapel Team


Abstract
--------

This CHIP defines when calls to autoCopy ("copy constructors" in C++ slang)
are to be inserted.

This CHIP is here temporarily. Its ideas will be merged
into Chapel's upcoming Constructor Story.


Context
-------

These rules address the following aspects of a Chapel program:

* variable declarations with initializer expressions

* procedure declarations

* procedure calls

* only variables of record types

* returning only by value

The rules consist of applying the following steps.
Steps 2a, 2b, 2c are independent of each other and can be applied
in any order.
Steps 3 and 4 yield the same result regardless of order of application.


Step 1: normalization of procedure calls
----------------------------------------

Consider a call ``f(actuals...)`` where ``f`` returns a value
(not by reference and not void).

* If it is the initializer expression of a variable, do not change it.

* Otherwise, add the following declaration:

  ``var tmp = f(actuals...)``

  and replace the original occurrence of ``f(actuals...)`` with ``tmp``.

After such normalization, each call to a function that returns a value
is the initializer expression of a variable. Likewise, each return statement
returns either a variable or nothing (void).


Step 2a: autoCopy for argument passing
--------------------------------------

* For each call and each argument passed by ``[const] in`` intent,
  add ``formal = autoCopy(actual)``.

Step 2b: autoCopy for value returning
-------------------------------------

* For each call that (a) initializes the variable ``v`` and
  (b) invokes ``f(...)``, for each return statement within ``f``
  that returns the variable ``r``, add ``v = autoCopy(r)``
  along that return path.

Step 2c: autoCopy for variable copying
--------------------------------------

* For each declaration ``var v2 = v1;``
  where ``v1`` is a variable (not a function call), possibly resulting
  from normalization, replace it with ``var v2 = autoCopy(v1);``.

Additional notes
----------------

* After completing Steps 2a, 2b, 2c, variable declarations store
  the results of r.h.s. into the l.h.s. by bit copy.

* These rules treat assignments as function calls. The default assignment
  for a record performs assignments between the respective fields
  of the l.h.s. and r.h.s.

Step 3: insert autoDestroy
--------------------------

* Insert ``autoDestroy(v);`` for each variable at the end of that
  variable's scope. The ``autoCopy`` inserted in Step 2b for value returning
  is performed before invoking ``autoDestroy`` for the variables
  leaving the procedure's top scope.

Step 4: remove copies
---------------------

* For each declaration ``var v2 = autoCopy(v1);`` where ``v1`` is not
  available and not modified through the end of the scope of ``v2``,
  remove that declaration (including the call ``autoCopy(v1)``)
  and replace ``v2`` with ``v1``.
