Chapel Package Manager
======================

Status
  Inactive - Implemented

Authors
  Kyle Brady,
  Ben Albrecht,
  Preston Sahabu


Abstract
--------

This CHIP proposes a package manager for Chapel and provides some
directions for future improvements. It primarily covers the design of
the initial Chapel package manager, but also includes some designs and
ideas for future work.

Credit
++++++

* Sam Boyer of the Glide package manager for Go. His article on Medium_
  provided an excellent guide and template for this proposal.

* Rust's cargo_. The long term answer for most questions was to look at what
  cargo is doing. They have a very well designed package manager, and
  reinventing the wheel should generally be avoided when dealing with
  package manager design. 

Rationale
+++++++++

Chapel's current approach of bundling any extra modules in the standard library
isn't sustainable if we wish to have a healthy ecosystem of libraries. There
are several problems with the current strategy:

* Modules are in our repository, so:

  * Developers must sign a CLA
  * Code must be under a compatible license
  * The core team needs to review each module

* Modules are gated for release alongside the compiler

Mason
+++++

``mason`` will be a command line tool for building Chapel programs, providing
a consistent way for libraries and applications to be built.

The authors of this proposal support the idea of writing ``mason`` in
Chapel. It would be good to have a piece of production code that is written in
Chapel and depended on by users and developers. The largest concern that has been
brought up with this idea is the lack of proper error handling in Chapel. However,
this should improve in parallel to the development of ``mason``.


Mason Pipeline
--------------

The package manager pipeline has 4 key states, where each state acts as the
input to the next state:

* `Project Code`_: ``src/``
* `Manifest File`_: ``Mason.toml``

  * Markup-style file containing package metadata and dependencies.

* `Lock File`_: ``Mason.lock``

  * Contains the necessary information to guarantee a consistent build on
    all supported platforms.

* **Dependency Code**: ``~/.mason/src/``

  * Dependencies that have been downloaded into a local directory.


Setup
+++++

``mason new [project name] [--vcs OPTION]`` is the command that initializes a
new project. It also creates a git repository unless ``--vcs none`` is included.

For example, after ``mason new MyPackage`` is run in an empty directory it will
have the following hierarchy:

::

  MyPackage/
    Mason.toml
    src/
      MyPackage.chpl

mason will enforce that the main file be named after the package to enforce
namespacing. While it is common practice for package names to be PascalCase
and chpl files to be lowercase, it is an acceptable tradeoff for reliability,
and MyPackage will be the first file listed in src/.

To work on an existing project, clone its repository and invoke ``mason build``
(see `Build System`_). This will fetch all the dependencies and build the project
for a fully functional copy.

Project Code
++++++++++++

This is the Chapel source code written by the package author.

For example, ``MyPackage.chpl``:

.. code-block:: chapel

   proc main() {
       writeln("Hello, world!");
   }

Project Code -> Manifest File
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

mason will provide command line support for adding and removing dependencies
to the manifest in the form of ``mason add [package] [version]`` and
``mason rm [package]`` when within the project directory.

The manifest may also be edited manually.

mason will not automatically generate any of the manifest from the project code. 

Manifest File
+++++++++++++

The ``Mason.toml`` manifest file will closely follow the design of
`Cargo's manifest file <http://doc.crates.io/manifest.html>`_,
``Cargo.toml``. Some fields will vary, if they are too Rust-specific or could
benefit from being more Chapel-specific.

For example, ``Mason.toml``:

.. code-block:: ini

   [package]
   name = "hello_world"
   version = "0.1.0"
   authors = ["Bradford Chamberlain <brad@chamberlain.com>"]
   license = "Apache-2.0"

   [dependencies]
   Curl = "1.0.0"

Package Registry
++++++++++++++++

Eventually we will want a service similar to Cargo's crates.io_ to serve as our
registry. Due to the amount of effort behind such a task, it has been decided
that this can come at a later stage.

The initial mason registry would be a GitHub repository containing a list of
versioned manifest files from packages, not unlike that of the OS X Homebrew
package manager registry.

The registry would follow a hierarchy as follows:

::

  https://github.com/chapel-lang/mason-registry

  registry/
    Curl/
        1.0.0.toml
        2.0.0.toml
    RecordParser/
        1.0.0.toml
        1.1.0.toml
        1.2.0.toml
    VisualDebug/
        2.2.0.toml
        2.2.1.toml

Each versioned manifest file would be identical to the manifest file in the
top-level directory of the package repository, with one additional field that
is not required in the repository manifest, a URL pointing to the repository
and revision in which the version is located.

Continuing the example from before, the 'registry' ``Mason.toml`` would include
the additional ``source`` field:


.. code-block:: ini

   [package]
   name = "hello_world"
   version = "0.1.0"
   authors = ["Brad Chamberlain <brad@chamberlain.com>"]
   license = "Apache-2.0"
   source = { git = "https://github.com/bradcray/hello_world", tag = "0.1.0" }

   [dependencies]
   Curl = "1.0.0"


There are some recognized downsides of using a GitHub repository as a registry:

* It is not be feasible to cache packages centrally, compromising the
  reliability of the entire package ecosystem.

  * The packages themselves are distributed despite there being a central
    registry of manifests.
  * We *cannot* guarantee that a given package version will always remain
    unchanged or even always exist.

    * Although some form of nightly/weekly testing could help mitigate this
      issue.

* It is not easy to allow users to submit packages without human intervention
  (gatekeeper accepting pull requests).

* GitHub's native interface would severely inhibit discoverability of packages.

  * This can circumvented by building a separate website for exploring the
    package ecosystem.

    * Julia does a great job at this in their Ecosystem-Pulse_.

For these reasons, we would eventually like to pursue a truly central registry
with cached packages and a first-class interface.

**Namespacing**

All packages will exist in a single common namespace with a first-come, first-served
policy. Though there are natural concerns about name squatting, these have been
addressed_ by the Cargo project. It is also easier to go to separate namespaces
than to roll them back, so this position affords flexibility.

**Semantic Versioning**

To assist version resolution, the registry will enforce the following conventions:

* The format for all versions will be a.b.c.

  * Major versions are denoted by a.
  * Minor versions are denoted by b.
  * Bug fixes are denoted by c.

* If the major version is 0, no further conventions will be enforced.

  * However, a package at major version 0 can only be included in a manifest by
    a specific bug fix.

* The major version must be advanced if and only if the update causes breaking API
  changes, such as updated data structures or removed methods and procedures. The
  minor and bug fix versions will be zeroed out. (ex. 1.13.1 -> 2.0.0)

* The minor version must be advanced if and only if the update adds functionality
  to the API while maintaining backward compatibility with the current major
  version. The bug fix version will be zeroed out. (ex. 1.13.1 -> 1.14.0)

* The bug fix must be advanced for any update correcting functionality within a
  minor revision. (ex. 1.13.1 -> 1.13.2)

* The grammar_ used to specify a range of compatible versions will be similar to
  that of Cargo.

**Package Integrity**

There will be two primary measures taken to ensure that submitted packages are
valid and not of poor quality:

* Continuous Integration (CI) tools such as Travis CI could run a suite of
  basic functionality tests to ensure a submitted package is properly
  setup. Tests might include:

  * Downloading the package.
  * Building the package.
  * Running any tests that the package provides.

* A set of core and trusted non-core Chapel community developers will serve
  as gatekeepers who will allow packages into the repository by merging
  pull requests that pass all tests.

  * Other non-automated review procedures can be done by the gatekeepers,
    but it would be ideal to keep this effort minimal if required at all.

  * This is similar to Homebrew's approach to package submission.

**Licensing**

Packages without a license field in their .toml will not be added to the
registry. The accepted license abbreviations can be found at SPDX_. 
License fields will propagate throughout their uses for developer convenience.

Manifest File -> Lock File
++++++++++++++++++++++++++

A lock file ensures repeatable builds on a given system, thus "locking" the
project's build sequence and configuration into place. It contains a serialized
directed acyclic graph of the dependencies build options from the manifest.

The lock file is more concrete than the manifest because it specifies Git SHA
revisions rather than abstract "versions" or "packages". Whether the lock
file is checked into the repository to ensure identical builds across all
systems is up to the project.

This step will be fully automated by mason, in which it:

* Parses the manifest file
* Builds a dependency directed acyclic graph (DAG)

  * If a cycle is formed by the dependencies, mason will print an error.

  * This should only occur if one of the dependencies depends on the
    current project.
    
* Performs the incompatible version resolution strategy

  * If multiple bug fixes of a package are present in the project, mason
    will use the latest bug fix. (ex. 1.1.0, 1.1.1 --> 1.1.1)

  * If multiple minor versions of a package are present in the project,
    mason will use the latest minor version within the common major version.
    (ex. 1.4.3, 1.7.0 --> 1.7) 
    
  * If multiple major versions are present, mason will print an error.
    (ex. 1.13.0, 2.1.0 --> incompatible) 

* Serializes the DAG and outputs it into ``Mason.lock``

If the user has manually edited their manifest file, they may update the
lock file using ``mason update`` from within the project directory. Otherwise,
the lock file is updated automatically when using ``mason add`` or ``mason rm``.
(see `Syncing Commands`_)

The user should never edit a ``Mason.lock`` file manually.

Lock File
+++++++++

The ``Mason.lock`` lock file will follow the design of ``Cargo.lock``. An
example of a ``Mason.lock`` generated from the previous ``Mason.toml`` example:

.. code-block:: ini

    [root]
    name = "hello_world"
    version = "0.1.0"
    dependencies = [ "curl 1.0.0 (git+https://github.com/tzakian/curl.git#9f35b8e439eeedd60b9414c58f389bdc6a3284f9)",]
    license = "Apache-2.0"

    [[package]]
    name = "curl"
    version = "1.0.0"
    license = "Apache-2.0"
    source= git+https://github.com/tzakian/curl.git#9f35b8e439eeedd60b9414c58f389bdc6a3284f9"


Lock File -> Dependency Code
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

The dependency code will be downloaded into a common pool of packages, under
the user's home directory by default. This mirrors Cargo's ``~/.cargo/src/``.

::

  ~/.mason/src/
    (dependencies)


Syncing Commands
++++++++++++++++

When any of ``add``, ``rm``, or ``update`` are invoked, mason will make sure that
the manifest file, lock file, and dependency code are kept in sync with each other.
Effectively, this means that when ``update`` is run, dependencies will be downloaded,
and when ``add`` or ``rm`` are run, ``update`` will be run.

To avoid unnecessary updates, a hash of the manifest will be kept in the lock file.
We will not hash the lock file because the dependencies across all projects are kept
in a single namespaced directory -- we can simply check if all the dependency
directories are present. 


Build System
------------

When invoked, ``mason build`` will do the following:

* Navigate to the root of the project.

* Run ``update`` to make sure any manual manifest edits are reflected in the
  dependency code.

* Build ``??.chpl`` in the ``/src`` directory, where ?? is the name of the project.
 
  * This file will be the designated main by the ``--main-module`` flag.

  * Library dependencies are included by specifying their main file from the
    dependency pool. 

  * Binary dependencies are included by specifying their main file from the
    dependency pool. 

* If the package is an application, build the binary into ``target/``.


``mason run`` will, in turn:

* Invoke ``build``.
  
* Run the resulting executable out of ``target/``, if it exists.

  * Runtime options may be included in the manifest, or may be passed to
    ``run`` on the command line. Command line options take precedence. 


For example, after ``mason run MyPackage``, the project directory appears as so:

::

  ~/.mason/src/

  MyPackage/
    Mason.toml
    Mason.lock
    src/
      MyPackage.chpl
    ( target/ )
      ( MyPackage )


Future Work
-----------

The first version of the package manager will be very simple with limited
functionality, but there are several more features that we wish to add
eventually. This section is dedicated to the subset of those features that have
been considered or partially designed.

C Dependencies
++++++++++++++

mason will support managing C dependencies in future versions. Unlike
Cargo, the management of these C dependencies will *not* be implemented as part
of the package manager. Instead, mason will interface with a tool specifically
designed for managing C dependencies. Though we would have to add a dependency
to our package manager, we avoid reinventing solutions to hard problems.

Presently, Nix_ is a strong candidate for this. However, Nix currently requires
being installed as root (or at least becomes much more complicated if it is
not). Nix also only works on linux/osx right now. Cygwin support is not ruled
out, but not actively worked on.

Another potential candidate that has been suggested is Conan_, but we have not
thoroughly investigated it yet.

**Example**

Lets go through an example from our package modules with a C dependency and see
how it would look as a package.


The LAPACK package with high level bindings:

::

  lapack/
    Mason.toml
    src/
      LAPACK.chpl

.. code-block:: ini

  # lapack/Mason.toml
  [package]
  name = "lapack"
  version = "0.1.0"
  authors = ["Ian Bertolacci <ian@example.com>"]
  license = "Apache-2.0"
  description = "High level bindings to LAPACK"

  [dependencies]
  lapack-lib = "0.1.0"


The LAPACK package with native bindings:

::

    lapack-lib/
      Mason.toml
      src/
        LAPACK_lib.chpl

.. code-block:: ini

  # lapack-lib/Mason.toml
  [package]
  name = "lapack-lib"
  version = "0.1.0"
  authors = ["Ian Bertolacci <ian@example.com>"]
  license = "Apache-2.0"
  description = "Native bindings to liblapack"

  links = "lapack"
  includes = "lapacke.h"

  # C dependencies
  [requires]
  liblapack = "3.3.0"


Things to note:

  * ``requires`` is a list of nix packages to be in the environment when
    building your program.  It's recommended to provide these, but they may not
    be used.
  * ``links`` is the library that is expected to be on your search path and will
    be added to the compile line.
  * ``includes`` is the header file that is expected to be on your search path
    and will be added to the compile line.

``mason build`` will download our lapack dependency, and build the program.
The dependency will be downloaded and placed in ``~/.mason/src/``. Nix will be
used to resolve the external dependencies and packages if it is available. Otherwise,
libraries and headers are expected to be placed on the normal search paths.


Other Future Work
+++++++++++++++++

**client:**

* `Developer dependencies`_
* Interoperability with other source control managers
* Improved tooling to assist in automating parts of source code -> manifest file
  * e.g. ``mason new <project-name> --app``
* Virtual environments with different Chapel, mason configs

**registry:**

* Truly centralized registry with cached packages
* "Blessed" versus "Open" packages (quality control)
* Checksumming (security for popular packages)
* Binary packages
* User-hosted registries

.. _Medium: https://medium.com/@sdboyer/so-you-want-to-write-a-package-manager-4ae9c17d9527#.id7wa9vae
.. _crates.io: https://crates.io/
.. _cargo: http://doc.crates.io/guide.html
.. _nix: https://nixos.org/nix/
.. _Ecosystem-Pulse: http://pkg.julialang.org/pulse.html
.. _addressed: https://internals.rust-lang.org/t/crates-io-package-policies/1041
.. _grammar: http://doc.crates.io/specifying-dependencies.html
.. _SPDX: http://spdx.org/licenses/
.. _Conan: https://www.conan.io/
.. _Developer dependencies: http://doc.crates.io/specifying-dependencies.html#development-dependencies
