.. _Chapter-Interoperability:

Interoperability
================

Chapel’s interoperability features support cooperation between Chapel
and other languages. They provide the ability to create software systems
that incorporate both Chapel and non-Chapel components. Thus, they
support the reuse of existing software components while leveraging the
unique features of the Chapel language.

Interoperability can be broken down in terms of the exchange of types,
variables and procedures, and whether these are imported or exported. An
overview of procedure importing and exporting is provided
in :ref:`Interop_Overview`. Details on sharing types, variables
and procedures are supplied in :ref:`Shared_Language_Elements`.

   *Future*.

   At present, the backend language for Chapel is C, which makes it
   relatively easy to call C libraries from Chapel and vice versa. To
   support a variety of platforms without requiring recompilation, it
   may be desirable to move to an intermediate-language model.

   In that case, each supported platform must minimally support that
   virtual machine. However, in addition to increased portability, a
   virtual machine model may expose elements of the underlying machine’s
   programming model (hardware task queues, automated garbage
   collection, etc.) that are not easily rendered in C. In addition, the
   virtual machine model can support run-time task migration.

The remainder of this chapter documents Chapel support of
interoperability through the existing C-language backend.

.. _Interop_Overview:

Interoperability Overview
-------------------------

The following two subsections provide an overview of calling
externally-defined (C) routines in Chapel, and setting up Chapel
routines so they can be called from external (C) code.

.. _Calling_External_Functions:

Calling External Functions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To use an external function in a Chapel program, it is necessary to
inform the Chapel compiler of that routine’s signature through an
external function declaration. This permits Chapel to bind calls to that
function signature during function resolution. The user must also supply
a definition for the referenced function by naming a C source file, an
object file or an object library on the ``chpl`` command line.

An external procedure declaration has the following syntax: 

.. code-block:: syntax

   external-procedure-declaration-statement:
     `extern' external-name[OPT] `proc' function-name argument-list return-intent[OPT] return-type[OPT]

Chapel code will call the external function using the parameter types
supplied in the ``extern`` declaration. Therefore, in general, the type
of each argument in the supplied ``argument-list`` must be the Chapel
equivalent of the corresponding external type.

The return value of the function can be used by Chapel only if its type
is declared using the optional ``return-type`` specifier. If it is
omitted, Chapel assumes that no value is returned, or equivalently that
the function returns ``void``.

It is possible to use the ``external-name`` syntax to create an
``extern`` function that presents a different name to Chapel code than
the name of the function actually used when linking. The
``external-name`` expression must evaluate to a ``param`` ``string``.
For example, the code below declares a function callable in Chapel as
``c_atoi`` but that will actually link with the C ``atoi`` function.



.. code-block:: chapel

     extern "atoi" proc c_atoi(arg:c_string):c_int;

At present, external iterators are not supported.

   *Future*.

   The overloading of function names is also not supported directly in
   the compiler. However, one can use the ``external-name`` syntax to
   supply a name to be used by the linker. In this way, function
   overloading can be implemented “by hand”. This syntax also supports
   calling external C++ routines: The ``external-name`` to use is the
   mangled function name generated by the external compilation
   environment [4]_.

..

   *Future*.

   Dynamic dispatch (polymorphism) is also unsupported in this version.
   But this is not ruled out in future versions. Since Chapel already
   supports type-based procedure declaration and resolution, it is a
   small step to translate a type-relative extern method declaration
   into a virtual method table entry. The mangled name of the correct
   external function must be supplied for each polymorphic type
   available. However, most likely the generation of ``.chpl`` header
   files from C and C++ libraries can be fully automated.

There are three ways to supply to the Chapel compiler the definition of
an external function: as a C source file (``.c`` or ``.h``), as an
object file and as an object library. It is platform-dependent whether
static libraries (archives), dynamic libraries or both are supported.
See the ``chpl`` man page for more information on how these file types
are handled.

.. _Calling_Chapel_Functions:

Calling Chapel Functions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To call a Chapel procedure from external code, it is necessary to expose
the corresponding function symbol to the linker. This is done by adding
the ``export`` linkage specifier to the function definition. The
``export`` specifier ensures that the corresponding procedure will be
resolved, even if it is not called within the Chapel program or library
being compiled.

An exported procedure declaration has the following syntax: 

.. code-block:: syntax

   exported-procedure-declaration-statement:
     `export' external-name[OPT] `proc' function-name argument-list return-intent[OPT] return-type[OPT]
       function-body

   external-name:
     expression

The rest of the procedure declaration is the same as for a non-exported
function. An exported procedure can be called from within Chapel as
well. Currently, iterators cannot be exported.

As with the ``extern-name`` for ``extern`` ``proc``, if this syntax
element is provided, then it must be a ``param`` ``string`` and will be
used to determine the name of the function to use when linking. For
example, the code below declares a function callable in C as
``chapel_addone`` but it is callable from Chapel code as ``addone``:



.. code-block:: chapel

     export "chapel_addone" proc addone(arg:c_int):c_int {
       return arg+1;
     }

..

   *Future*.

   Currently, exported functions cannot have generic, ``param`` or type
   arguments. This is because such functions actually represent a family
   of functions, specific versions of which are instantiated as need
   during function resolution.

   Instantiating all possible versions of a template function is not
   practical in general. However, if explicit instantiation were
   supported in Chapel, an explicit instantiation with the export
   linkage specifier would clearly indicate that the matching template
   function was to be instantiated with the given ``param`` values and
   argument types.

.. _Shared_Language_Elements:

Shared Language Elements
------------------------

This section provides details on how to share Chapel types, variables
and procedures with external code. It is written assuming that the
intermediate language is C.

Shared Types
~~~~~~~~~~~~

This subsection discusses how specific types are shared between Chapel
and external code.

.. _Referring_to_Standard_C_Types:

Referring to Standard C Types
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In Chapel code, all standard C types must be expressed in terms of their
Chapel equivalents. This is true, whether the entity is exported,
imported or private. Standard C types and their corresponding Chapel
types are shown in the following table.

=========== =========== ============ ============ ======== ===========
C Type      Chapel Type C Type       Chapel Type  C Type   Chapel Type
=========== =========== ============ ============ ======== ===========
int8_t      int(8)      uint8_t      uint(8)      \_real32 real(32)
int16_t     int(16)     uint16_t     uint(16)     \_real64 real(64)
int32_t     int(32)     uint32_t     uint(32)     \_imag32 imag(32)
int64_t     int(64)     uint64_t     uint(64)     \_imag64 imag(64)
chpl_bool   bool        const char\* c_string             
\_complex64 complex(64) \_complex128 complex(128)         
=========== =========== ============ ============ ======== ===========

Standard C types are built-in. Their Chapel equivalents do not have to
be declared using the ``extern`` keyword.

In C, the “colloquial” integer type names ``char``, ``signed char``,
``unsigned char``, (``signed``) ``short`` (``int``), ``unsigned short``
(``int``), (``signed``) ``int``, ``unsigned int``, (``signed``) ``long``
(``int``), ``unsigned long`` (``int``), (``signed``) ``long long``
(``int``) and ``unsigned long long`` (``int``) may have an
implementation-defined width. [5]_. When referring to C types in a
Chapel program, the burden of making sure the type sizes agree is on the
user. A Chapel implementation must ensure that all of the C equivalents
in the above table are defined and have the correct representation with
respect to the corresponding Chapel type.

.. _Referring_to_External_C_Types:

Referring to External C Types
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

An externally-defined type can be referenced using a external type
declaration with the following syntax. 

.. code-block:: syntax

   external-type-alias-declaration-statement:
     `extern' `type' type-alias-declaration-list ;

In each ``type-alias-declaration``, if the ``type-expression`` part is
supplied, then Chapel uses the supplied type specifier internally.
Otherwise, it treats the named type as an opaque type. The definition
for an external type must be supplied by a C header file named on the
``chpl`` command line.

Fixed-size C array types can be described within Chapel using its
homogeneous tuple type. For example, the C typedef 

.. code-block:: chapel

   typedef double vec[3];

can be described in Chapel using 

.. code-block:: chapel

   extern type vec = 3*real(64);

.. _Referring_to_External_C_Structs:

Referring to External C Structs
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

External C struct types can be referred to within Chapel by prefixing a
Chapel ``record`` definition with the ``extern`` keyword. 

.. code-block:: syntax

   external-record-declaration-statement:
     `extern' external-name[OPT] simple-record-declaration-statement

For example, consider an external C structure defined in ``foo.h``
called ``fltdbl``. 

.. code-block:: chapel

       typedef struct _fltdbl {
         float x;
         double y;
       } fltdbl;

This type could be referred to within a Chapel program using


.. code-block:: chapel

      extern record fltdbl {
        var x: real(32);
        var y: real(64);
      }

and defined by supplying ``foo.h`` on the ``chpl`` command line.

Within the Chapel declaration, some or all of the fields from the C
structure may be omitted. The order of these fields need not match the
order they were specified within the C code. Any fields that are not
specified (or that cannot be specified because there is no equivalent
Chapel type) cannot be referenced within the Chapel code. Some effort is
made to preserve the values of the undefined fields when copying these
structs but Chapel cannot guarantee the contents or memory story of
fields of which it has no knowledge.

If the optional ``external-name`` is supplied, then it is used verbatim
as the exported struct symbol.

A C header file containing the struct’s definition in C must be
specified on the chpl compiler command line. Note that only typdef’d C
structures are supported by default. That is, in the C header file, the
``struct`` must be supplied with a type name through a ``typedef``
declaration. If this is not true, you can use the ``external-name`` part
to apply the ``struct`` specifier. As an example of this, given a C
declaration of:



.. code-block:: chapel

     struct Vec3 {
       double x, y, z;
     };

in Chapel you would refer to this ``struct`` via



.. code-block:: chapel

     extern "struct Vec3" record Vec3 {
       var x, y, z: real(64);
     }

.. _Opaque_Types:

Opaque Types
^^^^^^^^^^^^

It is possible refer to external pointer-based C types that cannot be
described in Chapel by using the "opaque" keyword. As the name implies,
these types are opaque as far as Chapel is concerned and cannot be used
for operations other than argument passing and assignment.

For example, Chapel could be used to call an external C function that
returns a pointer to a structure (that can’t or won’t be described as a
pointer to an external record) as follows: 

.. code-block:: chapel

       extern proc returnStructPtr(): opaque;

       var structPtr: opaque = returnStructPtr();

However, because the type of ``structPtr`` is opaque, it can be used
only in assignments and the arguments of functions expecting the same
underlying type. 

.. code-block:: chapel

       var copyOfStructPtr = structPtr;

       extern proc operateOnStructPtr(ptr: opaque);
       operateOnStructPtr(structPtr);

Like a ``void*`` in C, Chapel’s ``opaque`` carries no information
regarding the underlying type. It therefore subverts type safety, and
should be used with caution.

.. _Shared_Data:

Shared Data
~~~~~~~~~~~

This subsection discusses how to access external variables and
constants.

A C variable or constant can be referred to within Chapel by prefixing
its declaration with the extern keyword. For example: 

.. code-block:: chapel

       extern var bar: foo;

would tell the Chapel compiler about an external C variable named
``bar`` of type ``foo``. Similarly, 

.. code-block:: chapel

      extern const baz: int(32);

would refer to an external 32-bit integer constant named ``baz`` in the
C code. In practice, external consts can be used to provide Chapel
definitions for #defines and enum symbols in addition to traditional C
constants.

   *Implementation Notes*.

   Note that since params must be known to Chapel at compile-time and
   the Chapel compiler does not necessarily parse C code, external
   params are not supported.

.. _Shared_Procedures:

Shared Procedures
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This subsection provides additional detail and examples for calling
external procedures from Chapel and for exporting Chapel functions for
external use.

.. _Calling_External_C_Functions:

Calling External C Functions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To call an external C function, a prototype of the routine must appear
in the Chapel code. This is accomplished by providing the Chapel
signature of the function preceded by the ``extern`` keyword. For
example, for a C function foo() that takes no arguments and returns
nothing, the prototype would be: 

.. code-block:: chapel

          extern proc foo();

To refer to the return value of a C function, its type must be supplied
through a ``return-type`` clause in the prototype. [6]_

If the above function returns a C ``double``, it would be declared as:


.. code-block:: chapel

          extern proc foo(): real;

Similarly, for external functions that expect arguments, the types of
those arguments types may be declared in Chapel using explicit argument
type specifiers.

The types of function arguments may be omitted from the external
procedure declaration, in which case they are inferred based on the
Chapel callsite. For example, the Chapel code 

.. code-block:: chapel

          extern proc foo(x: int, y): real;
          var a, b: int;
          foo(a, b);

would imply that the external function foo takes two 64-bit integer
values and returns a 64-bit real. External function declarations with
omitted type arguments can also be used call external C macros.

External function arguments can be declared using the
``default-expression`` syntax. In this case, the default argument will
be supplied by the Chapel compiler if the corresponding actual argument
is omitted at the callsite. For example: 

.. code-block:: chapel

          extern proc foo(x: int, y = 1.2): real;
          foo(0);

Would cause external function foo() to be invoked with the arguments 0
and 1.2.

C varargs functions can be declared using Chapel’s
``variable-argument-expression`` syntax (``...``). For example, the C
``printf`` function can be declared in Chapel as 

.. code-block:: chapel

          extern proc printf(fmt: c_string, vals...?numvals): int;

External C functions or macros that accept type arguments can also be
prototyped in Chapel by declaring the argument as a type. For example:


.. code-block:: chapel

          extern foo(type t);

Calling such a routine with a Chapel type will cause the type identifier
(e.g., ’int’) to be passed to the routine. [7]_

.. _Calling_Chapel_Procedures_Externally:

Calling Chapel Procedures Externally
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To call a Chapel procedure from external code, the procedure name must
be exported using the ``export`` keyword. An exported procedure taking
no arguments and returning a 64-bit integer can be declared as:


.. code-block:: chapel

   export proc foo(): int { ... }

If the optional ``external-name`` is supplied, that is the name used in
linking with external code. For example, if we declare 

.. code-block:: chapel

   export "myModule_foo" proc foo(): int { ... }

then the name ``foo`` is used to refer to the procedure within chapel
code, whereas a call to the same function from C code would appear as
``myModule_foo();``. If the external name is omitted, then its internal
name is also used externally.

When a procedure is exported, all of the types and functions on which it
depends are also exported. Iterators cannot be explicitly exported.

.. _Interop_Argument_Passing:

Argument Passing
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The manner in which arguments are passed to an external function can be
controlled using argument intents. The following table shows the
correspondence between Chapel intents and C argument type declarations.
These correspondences pertain to both imported and exported function
signatures.

======= =======
Chapel  C
======= =======
T       const T
in T    T
inout T T\*
out T   T\*
ref T   T\*
param  
type    char\*
======= =======

Currently, ``param`` arguments are not allowed in an extern function
declaration, and ``type`` args are passed as a string containing the
name of the actual type being passed. Note that the level of indirection
is changed when passing arguments to a C function using ``inout``,
``out``, or ``ref`` intent. The C code implementing that function must
dereference the argument to extract its value.

.. [4]
   In UNIX-like programming environments, ``nm`` and ``grep`` can be
   used to find the mangled name of a given function within an object
   file or object library.

.. [5]
   However, most implementations have settled on using 8, 16, 32, and 64
   bits (respectively) to represent ``char``, ``short``, ``int`` and
   ``long``, and ``long long`` types

.. [6]
   The return type cannot be inferred, since an ``extern`` procedure
   declaration has no body.

.. [7]
   In practice, this will typically only be useful if the external
   function is a macro or built-in that can handle type identifiers.
