Implement Object Copying Using a "Postblit" Method
##################################################

Status
  Draft

Author
  Tom Hildebrandt, Michael Ferguson


This proposal is to implement object copying using a bitwise copy followed by a
"postblit" operation.

Abstract
--------

In objects containing references, the choice between shallow and deep copying
influences semantics, performance and memory usage.  Even in garbage-collected
languages, a type designer must choose carefully when a deep copy is to be made.

Special functions provide an interface between the compiler and code that
implements a type, so that the choice between shallow and deep copying can be
implemented consistently.  These special functions include destruction,
default-initialization, copy-initialization and (usually) assignment.

The current proposal is to implement copy-initialization using a bitwise copy
followed by a "postblit" method call.  This idea is borrowed from the D Language
and is in contrast to the better-known copy-constructor.  Implementing
copy-initialization in this way can have significant performance benefits for
Chapel, since it interacts well with the bulk-copying of bits across slow
network connections.

In addition, this proposal includes the ideas that the compiler can use
bit-wise copies to move records between temporary storage locations,
provided that does not change the lifetime of the record. Lastly, the
proposal includes the idea that the compiler can create temporary bit-wise
copies or full copios of records, and that the compiler can optimize such
copies to produce fewer of them than necessary, as long as the program
behavior is preserved.

These ideas apply most importantly to records, but have a consistent
interpretation for classes as well.

Rationale
---------

The existing language concept for copy-initialization, the copy-constructor,
treats copying and any required fixup (i.e. construction) as a whole, and is
defined recursively.  A straightforward implementation thus leads to many
fine-grained copy operations at the leaves of a data structure.  

Network performance characteristics instead favor coarse-grained copy
operations.  By separating the data copying from subsequent fixup, it is
expected that much better object copying performance can be achieved --
especially for large data structures such as arrays.

In addition, the compiler sometimes needs to move a record from one
location to another. That might happen for example when returning a record
from a function - the record might need to move from the stack frame of
the called function, where it was allocated, to a new stack location in
the parent. Another example is when the compiler creates a temporary
object (for example to store the value returned from a function call). In
both of these cases, the move operation will be achieved with a bit copy -
without calling methods provided by the record implementor. A bit copy can
be used when the temporary copy does not affect the lifetime of the
record. This bit-copy idea provides the corresponding functionality to C++
move constructors - namely, a means to avoid performing a deep copy in
many cases. 


Description
-----------

This CHIP discusses special functions for records that are known to the
compiler. The compiler needs to be able to call these functions so that
the Chapel code can indicate how to initialize, copy, assign, or destroy
a variable.

default initialization
 initialize an object to a default state compatible with its destructor.
 
explicit initialization
 initialize an object with additional information by calling its constructor
 with *new*. See CHIP 4.

copy initialization
  initialize an object to be a copy of an existing object

assigment
  replace the contents of an initialized object with another initialized object

destruction
  releases resources held by an object, currently named ~RecordName()
  TODO: "invariant state" ?


Sepcial Functions before this CHIP
==================================

destruction
  Implemented by an `autoDestroy` function. The compiler-default
  implementation calls the destructor, which is empty by default.

default initialization
  Implemented using `_defaultOf` function. The compiler supplied default calls
  a zero-argument constructor if such a constructor was supplied.

copy initialization
  Implemented using `autoCopy` function. There is no compiler-supplied
  default.

assignment
  Uses the `=` operator. Compiler-supplied default is a field-wise
  assignment, but assignment of basic types (int,real,class instances)
  is a bitwise copy.

Semantics before this CHIP
==========================

The compiler has historically returned values by calling the copy
constructor inside of the called routine (TODO: from what to what)?
The compiler also makes bit copies of records in many cases. The
semantics are not really defined. TODO: autocopy for 'in' intent?


Proposed New Semantics
======================

We will decribe the new semantics in several principles.

Principle 1: Chapel can bit copy records
========================================

First, Chapel should be allowed to move a record in memory (with memcpy)
without calling any user-defined function. This is an important idea in
order to avoid unnecessary deep copies. It is also the design adopted by
both Rust and D (but not C++). This property is particularly useful when
the compiler needs to construct temporary values and move them to a new
location.

As a distributed language, Chapel will need to communicate records
regularly. We'd like to keep such communications as simple, efficient and
as as aggregated as possible.

A secondary argument for allowing the language to move records with
memcpy is that it allows the compiler to achieve 'move' semantics
more easily. In that case, ownership of a record is being transferred
from one location to another. The compiler only needs to avoid calling
the destructor for the source object (or arrange for the source object
to be set to a default value before its destructor is called).

The third reason to prefer that the language allow memcpys of records
is that it's what the implementation already does - and so is a more
achievable goal.

Note that if the implementation can bit copy records, there is no need for
a user-supplied move constructor - but specifying e.g. that an argument
should transfer ownership of a record is still valuable.

Principle 2: Copy is bit-copy followed by fixup
===============================================

Second, given that Chapel can bit-copy records, we propose to adopt
a D-like "postblit" idea rather than C++-like copy and move constructors.

The idea here is that the user will supply a constructor that will do any
fix-ups necessary in order to make a copy of a record after the memcpy has
already occurred.  Since the memcpy has already occurred, the postblit
method does not need to take any arguments other than `this`.  In
contrast, a copy constructor invocation takes in the source record as an
argument.

The main advantage of the postblit approach is that it makes it clear how
efficient bulk transfer optimizations (e.g.) can be implemented.

For example, if we do whole array assignment of records across locales,
one might assume that the transfer could not be achieved in bulk - but it
can because of our first design principle. The natural implementation of
(1-D non-distributed) whole array assignment would perform a single GET
to transfer all of the data (i.e. a distributed memcpy). Then, the
implementation just needs to be sure to call the postblit method on each
newly copied record.

.. code-block:: chapel

  // after the copy, run the postblit methods
  for x in dstArray {
    x.postblit();
  }

If we instead had a copy constructor, the obvious - but wrong - conclusion
would be that bulk transfer cannot occur for arrays of records with a
non-trivial copy constructor. It can occur because of the Decision 1
(that Chapel can bit-copy records). But the trouble does not
stop there. Suppose you are implementing the bulk copy optimization - you
have copied the records and now you need to call the copy constructors.
You'd be tempted to call the copy constructors supplying the already
copied data as the argument:

.. code-block:: chapel

  // after the copy, run the copy constructors
  for x in dstArray {
    x.copy(x);
  }

But, that would not be OK because we want people to be able to 'memcpy' in
their copy constructor (for example, the default compiler-generated
copy constructor could call memcpy). This would create a memcpy with
src==dst.

So, you'd have to write it like this:

.. code-block:: chapel

  // after the copy, run the copy constructors
  for x in dstArray {
    var tmp:R;
    memcpy(dst=tmp, src=x);
    x.copy(tmp);
  }

which seems a little bit pointless but is also less efficient.

The second advantage to the postblit approach is that it removes the
temptation to write programs that will break under Decision 1. In
particular, if you can have a copy constructor that takes in an argument,
you might be tempted to declare that argument as 'ref' and then modify
it, for example to zero it out. However such programs will be wrong
because of Decision 1 - the argument to the copy constructor might not
be the only version of a record. The changes to that record may not
make it back to the version that will eventually be destroyed.

The third advantage is that it is simpler than the copy constructor.
It's possible to write a copy constructor out of postblit but not possible
to write postblit out of copy constructors.

The fourth advantage (cited by D developers) is that postblit "scales
better" when you add new fields to a record with a custom postblit method,
you probably don't need to modify the postblit function. (vs the copy
constructor which you would need to modify in order to achieve the copy).

Finally, a note that it is straightforward to implement a default
assignment for a record supplying a postblit routine:

.. code-block:: chapel

  proc =(ref lhs:R, rhs:R) {
      // copy lhs into tmp
      memmove(dst=tmp, src=lhs)
      // copy rhs into lhs
      memmove(dst=lhs, src=rhs);
      lhs.postblit();
      // destroy tmp
      call tmp destructor;
  }

Also note that it is no longer necessary for the default assignment
overload to go field-by-field to achieve the copy. It can always
do the complete copy with memcpy (because of Decision 1). Then, using
the postblit strategy, a compiler-generated postblit method should
call the postblit method on each field in turn. (of course such
postblit calls can be omitted when they do nothing).


Principle 3: Copies can be added or removed by the implementation
=================================================================

A full copy is user-visible since the postblit constructor is called.
However, the Chapel compiler is free to create more copies than
are strictly necessary, or to optimize copies that would be apparent
into fewer copies.

.. code-block:: chapel

  {
    var A: MyRecord;
    var B: MyRecord;
    var C: MyRecord;
    A = ...;
    B = A;
    C = B;
    var D = C;
    var E = D;
    f(E);
  }

In this example, strictly speaking, we'd expect each of the variables
A, B, C, D, and E to contain a full copy. However, the compiler can
show that B, C, D, and E are not used. Therefore, the compiler may
remove those copies and simplify this example to the following:

.. code-block:: chapel

  {
    var A: MyRecord;
    A = ...;
    f(A);
  }

That is the case *even if* MyRecord supplies custom assignment, default
initalization, destruction, or postblit constructor routines. The compiler
can change the number or order of these calls in ways that can be observed
if those routines have side effects. However, programs with assignment,
initialization, destruction, or postblit construction routines that
are limited to modifying the relevant arguments will have consistent
behavior.

Principle ?
===========

Here is another principle (C) I use above:

   var r = EXPR;

is defined as:

   allocate 'r'
   invoke constructor into 'r' with EXPR as the actual argument

Principle ?
===========

Return value semantics

BEFORE THIS CHIP

    * Compiler calls copy constructor inside called routine.
    * Returned value is always "owned"

FROM TOM's PROPOSAL

  * Return value semantics

    * ``postblit`` should be called 
      * After space has been allocated and the result copied into it
      * Before the stack frame for the called function is deleted

TODO: Michael doesn't think we should call postblit here.


    * Why not skip the postblit?

      * Lifetime of the return value must be extended past the return

        * To provide the forward owner (if there is one) a chance to make a copy.

          * Invoking copy semantics (postblit) before return is one way to do this
          * Maybe not the only option



Const fields
============

How does postblit interact with const fields?


(c1) Postblit cannot modify 'const' fields.

(c2) Postblit has a field initialization phase, like a regular
constructor before entering the open curly brace. In that phase
individual fields are accessible and modifiable, however the object as a
whole does not exist yet.

Narrow fields and copying across locales
========================================

How does postblit interact with narrow fields?

Our current planned strategy is to make the postblit constructor
take as an argument a ref to the original object. Such an approach
would still allow bulk copies in arrays for example, but would also
allow the postblit function to repair a narrow pointer because it
would know the original locale.

Along with that, any copying across locales needs to call either
postblit the assignment overlead. If a record:

 * has a nontrivial postblit constructor, and
 * has any narrow pointers in fields

then it is not sufficient to bit-copy that record across locales.

Other options:
 
Ways to Support C Pointers Across Locales

  1) only use wide C pointers.
  2) always pass records by reference. 
  3) postblit function takes in source locale
  4) Always use assign overload (e.g.) instead of bit-copy/postblit
     when moving data acrosss locales.
  5) compiler automatically promoting local pointers used in postblit

.. code-block:: chapel

  record R {
    ...
  }


  var myR: R;

  on ... {
    ...myR...
  }


Q: Is the reference to 'myR' indeed a reference to the original
object?  Or could a copy be made?  And if so, in what circumstances?

Q: what if we return a record from within an on statement?


Proposed Special Functions
==========================

destruction
  No change. Implemented by an `autoDestroy` function. The compiler-default
  implementation calls the destructor, which is empty by default. TODO:
  why do we need autoDestroy? Why is ~MyRecord not sufficient? Is
  autoDestroy be an implementation detail, with no impact on semantics?

default initialization
  Implemented using `_defaultOf` function. The compiler supplied default calls
  a zero-argument constructor if such a constructor was supplied. TODO:
  should this be implemented with zero-argument constructor always? Or
  "postzero" ?

copy initialization
  Implemented as bitwise copy followed by a postblit constructor call. The
  compiler will generate a default postblit constructor that calls any
  the postblit constructor recursively on all fields and on any base
  record sub-object. The postblit constructor call implements any deep
  copy semantics that are desired.
  TODO:
  what exactly is this constructor called? In D it is this(this). If it's a
  constructor, do we need it to take in an argument? Can we have constructors
  with more than one name?

assignment
  Uses the `=` operator. Compiler-supplied default bit copies the
  destination to a temporary, bit copies the source into the destination,
  calls postblit on the destination, and then calls the destructor on 
  the temporary. Users can overload the assigment operator
  to do something else that might be more efficient. The assignment
  operator is only called for uses the `=` operator; in other words,
  if the compiler needs to create a copy it will do so using copy
  initialization.
 
TODO: Original Outline Material
===============================

* Proposed
 
  * Scoped variables are named variables, formals and fields, and function return values.

      * By implication, special functions are not called to create/destroy temporary copies
      * By further implication, objects can be moved around by bitwise copying (blitting)

        * An object becomes fixed in memory after a reference to it has been created.
      * How records are passed back as function return values is unclear.

     * Scoped variables are named variables, formals and fields, and function return values.

       * By implication, special functions are not called to create/destroy temporary copies
       * By further implication, objects can be moved around by bitwise copying (blitting)
       * An object becomes fixed in memory after a reference to it has been created.

     * How records are passed back as function return values is unclear.



  * Proposal TODOs

    * Come up with a consistent naming scheme for the well-known functions
    * Describe compiler-provided behavior.
    * Review consistency of the relationship between compiler-supplied and user overrides for both well-known and user functions

* Discussion

  * Default-Initialization

    * Pro

      * Usually zero-initialization works OK
      * Overridable if user desires
      * Consistent with copy-initialization using postblit

    * Con

      * Zero-initialization may be wasted effort if fixup sets fields explicitly

  * Copy-Initialization

    * Bulk copy of array implementations can be very effciient

      * All array elements copied in one go
      * Then, postblit applied to each element in turn

        * Parallel application of element-wise postblit is possible

          * Assuming no dependencies among elements

            * Definition of postblit should guarantee this
            * Not necessarily guaranteed

              * Reference to global data
              * Reference to array as a whole through parent pointer

          * Fixup of inter-element dependencies should be supplied at the
            container level

            * I.e. treating those dependencies at the element level is bad design
    * Pro

      * More efficient for copying large data structures
      * No fixup required for shallow copy semantics
      * Overridable if user desires

    * Con

      * Wasted effort for fields overwritten in fixup

        * Copying creates a "locally-cached copy"

          * Information used by postblit needed to be transmitted anyway

  * Assignment

    * Pro

      * Supports bulk copy with no extra work




TODO: Argument intents. in -> full copy. out-> temporary? 
      const -> could be a temporary copy or a ref?

TODO: should bitwise copy be exposed as a user concept for "no magic"?


Tom's 3 cases where a full copy is required:
  - assign to variable / in/inout/out intent
  - copy into field
  - return value



