Tuple Semantics
===============

Status
  Draft

Author
  Vassily Litvinov, Chapel Team


Abstract
--------

Tuples behave as records, with some fields being automatically 'ref' fields.
The ref and const attributes of a field are consistent with return intents.


Motivation
----------

Chapel makes use of tuples as a convenience for bundling several items
together. This is done when passing them into and out of functions,
variable-length argument lists, yielding from iterators, storing in
variables and data structures.

This CHIP defines the semantics of what tuples are.
It is intended to add precision to certain parts
of the spec and to settle some open questions.


Rationale
---------

We had been considering two major options:

* a tuple is a shorthand for writing down individual variables
* a tuple is a shorthand for creating a record

The key appeal of the "individual variables" option is
the preservation of argument and return intents.
E.g if A is an array, ``f((1,A));`` and ``return (1,A);``
pass/return 1 by value and A by reference.

The appeal of the "record" option is:

* tuples are record-like in Rust, Swift, Fortress
* (and also in Python, Ruby, Julia, although that's less interesting)
* a few team members already had the mental model of tuples as records
* grouping a few things together sounds like creating a record
* the implementation had already treated tuples as records

We decided to determine ref-ness of a tuple component
based on the return intent for that component's type
(see below),
so that ``return (1,A);`` returns `A` by reference.
The consequence of this is that ``var t = (1,A);``
stores `A` by reference, which was preferred by
a few team members.
(`A` above is an array.)


Tuples Behave As Records
------------------------

A tuple is implicitly a record.
A tuple component is implicitly a field of that record.
All definitions applicable to records apply to tuples as well,
except as specified in this CHIP.

Notation:

* "tuple record" is such a record implicitly created for a tuple
* "user record" is a user-defined (non-tuple) record
* "record" refers to either a tuple record or a user record


Determining Whether A Field Is Ref
----------------------------------

Given the type of a tuple component,
the corresponding field of the tuple record is a `var` field
when the default return intent for that type is "by value."
Otherwise the default return intent is `ref` and
the tuple record's field is a `ref` field.

The default return intent is clarified in the following section.


Default Return Intent
---------------------

This section clarifies the "Return Intents" section of the
"Procedures" chapter of the spec.

When a function's return intent is not specified explicitly,
the function is said to have the "default" return intent.
It is an abstract return intent. Depending on the return type,
the corresonding concrete intent is either by value or `ref`.

When the concrete intent is by value, the function returns
an r-value. When the concrete intent is `ref`, it is equivalent
to the explicit `ref` return intent and the subsection
"The Ref Return Intent" applies.

The following tables defines the concrete intent
for the default return intent and a given return type.

=======    ========
type       intent
=======    ========
bool       by value
int        by value
uint       by value
real       by value
imag       by value
complex    by value
string     by value
tuple      by value
record     by value
class      by value
union      by value
sync       `ref`
single     `ref`
atomic     `ref`
dmap       `ref`
domain     `ref`
array      `ref`
=======    ========

This CHIP also re-opens this question.
What is the concrete intent when the return intent is `const` and
the return type is a domain, array, sync/single, atomic?
E.g. by value, by const ref, ...?


Argument Intents For Tuples
---------------------------

Argument intents for tuples are the same as for records.
In particular, the default intent for tuples is `const`;
Cray Chapel's `const` intent for tuples is `const ref`.

This CHIP also clarifies the default behavior of
constructing a copy of a record with a `ref` field.
Namely, the corresponding field of the copy
references the same variable as that field of the source.

Such a copy is constructed in the following cases,
unless optimized away by the compiler:

* declaring a variable or a field or (in the future) array element whose initialization expression is the source record

* passing the source record into a function by `in`, `const in`, `inout`, or `out` intent

* returned the source record from a function by value


Corner Cases and Open Issues
----------------------------

Records are stored in tuples by value. Modification
of a tuple component does not affect the original record.
For example:

.. code-block:: chapel

  var rec: MyRecord;
  var tup = (rec,1);
  tup(1) = ...;      // does not affect 'rec'

By contrast, arrays are stored in tuples by reference.
This is a change from the previously-implemented semantics.
For example:

.. code-block:: chapel

  var Arr: [1..10] real;
  var tup = (Arr,1);
  tup(1) = tup(2);   // updates 'Arr'

Consider a tuple type `T` for which the corresponding record type has
`ref` field(s). The default value for such type `T` is *not* provided.
An attempt to declare a variable `tup` of such a type
without an initialization expression is a compile-time error.
Our implementation will not implicitly provide another variable
for this field of `tup` to reference.
If this presents a significant user issue, we will look for solutions.

Currently there is no way to create a tuple whose components:

* reference variables of "by value" types like integers, or
* are variables, not references to other variables", of "reference" types like arrays.

Passing a tuple literal to a function by `ref` intent is an error.

Assigning to a tuple with an array component results in copying
into that component's array, not into re-aliasing that component
to point to the RHS array.
