Chapel Improvement Proposals
============================

Status
  Informational

Author
  Michael Ferguson


In order to better keep track of proposed improvements for the Chapel, I've
created a concept of Chapel Improvement Proposals or CHIPs. This idea mimics
Python Enhancement Proposals (PEPs) or D Improvement Proposals (DIPs) if you
are familiar with those.

Abstract
--------

This document provides an overview of Chapel Improvement Proposals (CHIPs) and
serves as a template for other CHIPs.

Rationale
---------

It can be difficult to keep track of proposed improvements for the Chapel
project - especially when the implementation is deferred for some reason. These
design ideas as well as any decisions or consensus reached about the idea need
to be recorded so that work will not have to start over when the proposal
becomes higher priority.

Description
-----------

Sometimes it is useful to use a documentation format to arrive at consensus on
a language or library design issue. The CHIPs contained here are Chapel
Improvement Proposals. (The idea here is similar to D Improvement Proposals or
Python Enhancement Proposals). Here are the key features and benefits to
using CHIPs:

 * Each CHIP is stored in version control as part of the Chapel project,
   and so the history of the CHIP will be automatically maintained.
 * As a proposal is discussed, the CHIP will be updated to reflect
   any decisions made on the matter.
 * CHIPs can record design decisions that have been made. Otherwise, it is
   hard to track all of the proposals and which ones are moving forward.

Chapel Improvement Proposals should be used to document the planned design for
new features and to track their implementation progress.  Not all new features
need to go through this process. In particular, bug reports and feature
requests should continue to be filed as .future files in Chapel's testing
system. Likewise, not all discussion of a CHIP needs to be connected to the
CHIP itself. The CHIP documents should record the results of discussions
whenever high-level decisions about the design or implementation strategy have
been made.

When referring to a CHIP, you can use CHIP and the number (so this document is
CHIP 1).

The author or authors of a CHIP are expected to advocate for the idea and
to update the CHIP the idea progresses.

The key parts of a CHIP are:
 * a title
 * a status
 * an abstract summarizing the proposal
 * a rationale explaining what problem the proposal is solving
 * any other sections needed to record the idea and the rational for any
   decisions

Each CHIP should be written in ReStructured Text. That way, they can be easily
viewed in a text editor and also converted into other formats including html
for web pages. Since ReStructured Text is the same format used for chpldoc
documentation strings, Chapel contributors will need to work with fewer
formats.

A CHIP should be at least a few paragraphs to have enough information content
to be reasonable for this format.

Title
+++++

Each CHIP should have a short title.

Status
++++++

As a Chapel Improvement Proposal is discussed with the Chapel community, it
should be updated to record the level of consensus with a Status marker.
A CHIP can be Active or Inactive.

 * Active CHIPs are under consideration or are documentation that is not
   present elsewhere (such as this document).  The following keywords
   might also be useful in describing the status of an active CHIP:

    * Draft - CHIPs start here
    * Informational - No longer a draft. Informational.
    * Partially Accepted - There is agreement on the general direction but
      some details need attention.
    * Accepted - The Chapel community likes the idea
    * Partially Implemented - Accepted and additionally, some of the
      described functionality is implemented in the repository


 * Inactive CHIPs are only of historical interest. If they were
   implemented, the authoritative documentation is elsewhere. The following
   keywords might also be useful in describing the status of an inactive
   CHIP:
    * Rejected - The proposal has been discussed and the Chapel project does
      not plan to incorporate the proposal.
    * Withdrawn - A champion can withdraw their proposal for any reason
    * Implemented - Work on the feature has completed and it is in the
      repository. This normally also means the feature is documented
      elsewhere, outside of the CHIP.
    * Superseded - The proposal has been replaced by another proposal

A Status does not need to be limited to keywords; it can link to issues
or describe in other words what is going on with a CHIP.

Abstract
++++++++

Each CHIP should have a short paragraph summarizing the proposal.

Rationale
+++++++++

Each CHIP should have a discussion of the problem it is attempting to solve.

Details
+++++++

Each CHIP can contain any other sections that are appropriate to record the
proposal idea, design details, implementation details, and justification for
decisions.

