.. _initialization:

Basics of Initialization
========================

Status:
  Partially Accepted - `noinit` part under discussion in issue #8792

Authors:
  Michael Ferguson

Abstract
--------

A description of what constitutes initialization and the different kinds
of initialization in Chapel programs for non-generic records and
non-generic classes.

Rationale
---------

This document provides common language for describing initialization
and some basic understanding of when initialization occurs. While the
current language specification covers these topics, this document was
created as part of a group of CHIPs to do with improvements to
initializers and initialization. Thus, this document focuses on
behaviors specific to the new design.

This document provides background for :ref:`Initializers` and
:ref:`record-copies`.

Description
-----------

When a new Chapel variable is created, it is initialized. In other words,
it is set to some initial state.

In the discussion below, we will assume that `R` is a non-generic record
and `C` is a non-generic class.


Record Initialization
+++++++++++++++++++++

This section applies to non-generic records.  Also, these examples are meant
to be introductory. While these examples should be correct with respect
to all planned ways to reduce unnecessary record copies, the details of
these are discussed in other documents.


.. code-block:: chapel

  var x:R;

`x` is automatically initialized by a call to `x.init()`.

.. code-block:: chapel

  var x:R = noinit;

`x` is automatically initialized by a call to `x.init(noinit=true)`.

.. code-block:: chapel

  var x:R = new R(<args>);
  // or, equivalently
  var x = new R(<args>);

`x` is initialized by a call to `x.init(<args>)`.

.. code-block:: chapel

  var x:R = ...;
  var y:R = x;
  ... uses of both x and y ...

We say that `y` is `copy initialized` from `x`. Since `x` and `y` both
exist after `y` is initialized and they are different record variables,
they must not be observed to alias. That is, modifications to a field in
`x` should not cause the corresponding field in `y` to change.

Note that at the time of this writing, specific syntax for specifying how
a record should be `copy initialized` is still under discussion.

.. code-block:: chapel

  record MyRecord {
    var field:R;

    proc init(const ref arg:R) {
      field = arg;   // Note Here
      super.init();
    }
  }

This example shows field initialization. The statement `field = arg`
causes `field` to be `copy initialized` from `arg`.

.. code-block:: chapel

  proc returnR() {
    var ret = new R(<args>);
    return ret;
  }
  var x:R = returnR();

`x` is initialized to have the same value as `ret`. There are several
possible mechanisms for how this can be accomplished, but `x` does not
necessarily need to be `copy initialized` from `ret`. This case is
discussed in more detail in :ref:`record-copies`.

There are many other situations beyond the examples above in which `copy
initialization` occurs. The document :ref:`record-copies` describes these
in detail.

.. code-block:: chapel

  var x:R;
  var y:R;
  ...;
  x = y;

The statement `x = y` here is called assignment. It is different from
initialization. It will be translated to a call to the `=` operator with
the arguments `x` and `y`. Assignment is different from initialization
because in assignment, the left-hand-side variable has already been
initialized and is being set again.



Class Initialization
++++++++++++++++++++

This section is a about non-generic classes.

.. code-block:: chapel

  var x:C;

`x` is automatically initialized to `nil`.

.. code-block:: chapel

  var x:C = new C(<args>);
  // or, equivalently
  var x = new C(<args>);

`x` is automatically initialized to the result of:

 1) allocating memory for a class instance of type `C`
 2) invoking `x.init(<args>)` to initialize that instance

.. code-block:: chapel

  var x:C = ...;
  var y:C = x;

`y` and `x` point to the same class instance. We can say that the
variable `y` is initialized from the variable `x`. That initialization
just amounts to copying a pointer value and no user-defined initializer
is invoked.

Related Documents
+++++++++++++++++

 * :ref:`Initializers` describes how initializers can be specified
 * :ref:`record-copies` describes exactly when copy or move
   initialization occur.

